As per the Indian culture, before starting any auspicious
work, prayers are offered to invoke God, for seeking his
blessings. Chanakya also offered prayer to the creator of the
three worlds-earth, heaven and hell; omniscient,
omnipresent before starting his great manuscript. Invoking
God he said, "Oh God! For the benefit of mankind, I am
about to start work on these political guidelines collected
from different manuscripts. So, Oh God! Please grant me
strength and your blessings."

Through the study of this manuscript, after thought and
reflection, even an ordinary person will gain knowledge to
distinguish between capability-incompetence and
rightwrong. Through this manuscript, I wish to create
consciousness in human beings towards good deeds versus
sins, morality versus immorality and duty versus
irresponsibility. By observing this moral behaviour, human
beings should enlighten their lives. Then, the purpose of this
manuscript will be fulfilled.

For the benefit of the mankind, I shall describe those
secret mysteries of politics, the knowledge of which will
make man omniscient. If he follows the thoughts on moral
behaviour in this manuscript, then most certainly, he shall
attain success.

By preaching foolish pupils, looking after a wicked
woman or keeping company of worried persons, even
scholars will suffer. Therefore, foolish persons should never
be encouraged to undertake any good deed. One must stay
away from a characterless woman, otherwise his image will
be tarnished. Similarly, an unhappy person can never give
happiness, so stay away from him.

A person who keeps company of a sharp-tongued
woman, a sinful friend, also retains a traitorous and selfish
servant, is playing with his life. Such a person can be
consumed by death any time.

Any person, who saves for hard times or crisis, is an
intelligent person. All efforts must be made to protect such
savings. A woman is also like your wealth, so she must also
be protected. But before this, he must ensure his own
security, for only if he is secure he will be capable to secure
his wealth and woman.

People must save for crisis. But he should never think
that he will be able to avert the crisis by his wealth.
Lakshmi, the Goddess of wealth, is mobile; it is never
permanent at any place. While accumulation of wealth is an
indication of intelligence but it does not mean that crisis can
be averted.

Any place, where man does not have respect-honour, no
sources of income/employment, suitable well wishing
friends/ relations, facilities for learning-education, such a
place is most unsuitable. It should be left without any delay.

Any place, which lacks the five basic conveniences, i.e.
Brahmins to perform religious ceremonies, a just king,
prosperous traders, flowing rivers and proper medical
facilities, such a place is totally unsuitable for an intelligent
person. It should be left immediately.

Servants are tested by fulfilment of their
responsibilities, friends are tested in times of crisis, relations
are tested in times of sorrow or incurable sickness and a
woman is tested when you have no money.

According to Chanakya, a man's true well-wisher is the
one who extends supports in sickness, famine, being
bothered by an enemy, in a difficult situation or in a crisis
and after death, partakes in your cremation. In other words,
a true friend is the one who shares both, your happiness
and sorrow.

People, who stray from their planned and feasible tasks
and jump to unplanned and unachievable tasks, never
succeed. They should, therefore, attempt only those tasks,
which they are confident of achieving.

Even an ugly woman of upper caste is more suited for
a scholar and an intelligent person. They should, therefore,
marry an upper caste woman of equal status. Contrarily,
marrying a beautiful woman of lower caste results in
destruction of intellect and wisdom. Such relations are
temporary and scholars should avoid them.

Sharp clawed beasts, long horned animals, rapidly
flowing rivers, armed persons, women and relations of
royalty are not trustworthy. In other words, they can deceive
any time. People should not trust them.

According to Chanakya, if it is possible to extract
nectar from poison, then it should be consumed without any
hesitation. Similarly, you must accept gold extracted from
impure metals, learning from a common man and a cultured
woman from low caste without delay.

About women, Chanakya says that, as compared to
men, their diet is twice as much, modesty is four times,
courage is six times and desire for sex is eight times.

According to Chanakya, natural shortcomings are
personal for everyone. Everyone is born with some natural
shortcomings. He has included lying, cunning, foolishness,
greed, impurity and cruelty in women as natural
shortcomings. But he also qualifies that it is not necessary
that every woman has the abovementioned shortcomings.

Chanakya says that being able to afford and eat
delicacies; a woman having beauty and sexual prowess;
someone having huge wealth as well as the spirit of charity,
are rare virtues only obtained as a result of devotional
prayer or the good deeds of the previous birth.

Any person, whose son is obedient, wife is loyal,
wellmannered and is fully satisfied with his hard-earned
income, enjoys the bliss of heaven in his lifetime. In other
words, he is extremely satisfied and happy.

According to Chanakya, a true son is the one, who
always obeys his parents. Only a person, who brings up his
child properly, looks after his sorrow and happiness, is fit to
be a father, in real terms. Only a trustworthy person can be
a true friend and a woman, who delivers happiness to her
husband, can, in fact, be called a wife.

Like most fruits which look good from outside are not
sweet, similarly, people who talk sweet can be dangerous
and untrustworthy. People, who flatter on your face and
criticise behind your back, are not fit to be friends. They are
like poison in milk. One should always be cautious of them
and get rid of them at the earliest.

Although, according to Chanakya, one should not trust a
mean friend, he has suggested being wary of good and well
meaning friend also. In this context, he says that in case the
well meaning friend turns enemy, then because he is aware
of your personal secrets, he can cause damage to you.

While planning out or implementing any desired work, if
you disclose it, its successful conclusion becomes doubtful.
So, take care not to disclose it to anyone till its successful
conclusion.

Ignorance is not only painful but man is also subjected
to mockery on account of it, adolescence can also cause
extreme pain. But, according to Chanakya, being dependent
on someone is most painful. Such a person can be
compared to an animal. He has to act on someone elses
orders. So, man should live life with strength.

It is not necessary that every mountain has a precious
stone's mine, every elephants forehead is adorned with the
mother of pearl, every place is inhabited by gentlemen and
every forest contains sandalwood trees. In other words, this
world is inhabited by people of different characteristics. We
must, therefore, develop contacts only with gentlemen and
superior persons. This will ensure fulfilment of the desired
work.

Knowledgeable persons are able to eliminate ignorance
through their knowledge, so they must build the character
of their children. They must develop their talents through
proper education and devotion. This will make their inbuilt
talents worthy of worship and respect. Through this shloka,
Chanakya, appreciating the talented person, says that like
you automatically bow your head in respect when you see a
religious place, similarly, talented people by becoming
symbols of knowledge and belief, find a place in the hearts
of people.

Foolish and ignorant people are subjected to mocking.
Amongst the learned people, their condition is like that of a
crow amongst swans. He is neither able to express his ideas
nor is he able to accept ideas of wisdom of others. For this
reason, Chanakya says that those parents, who do not
arrange for proper education of their children, are their
worst enemies.

Life's every moment, hour and day is important. So,
man must use it purposefully. For this, it is necessary that
everyday he does self-study of a ved mantra, half a shloka,
shlokansh or a word. If for any reason he is unable to do so,
then he must donate. If it is not possible to donate, then he
should perform an act of kindness or do a good deed during
the day. People, who do not follow this, are wasting every
moment of their life.

There are some sorrows in a man's life which are
impossible to forget. Losing your wife, an insult by a near
and dear one, burden of debt, serving a wicked master and
living a life of poverty with fools-these hardships cause
illness and push a man towards death.

Chanakya says that as the trees on the banks of a
rapidly flowing river are damaged soon, similarly a woman
staying with another man or a king without an able minister
is ruined soon.

According to Chanakya, as a Brahmin with the power of
his knowledge, a king with the might of his army, a
businessman with his wealth and a scheduled caste with his
servility express their existence, similarly, everyman's
existence is expressed by some form of power. He is
completely useless without any power.

Chanakya says that a guest is important only if his stay
is short. If without hesitation or shamelessly he extends his
stay, then it is graceless, as a prostitute leaves a poor man,
the subjects leave a defeated king and birds leave a dead
tree, similarly, a guest must quickly leave after having and
praising the food, offered to him.

Chanakya says that as a Brahmin moves on after
receiving offerings, a student goes his way after completing
his education and animals abandon a burnt forest, similarly,
a man should quickly leave the abode taken up for attaining
his objective, after achieving his objective. This will indicate
his wisdom.

Even intelligent and wise men are ruined after some
time, if they remain in the company of immoral, sinful,
wicked or cruel-natured persons. Such persons are like a
coal mine where everything turns black. You must avoid
friendship with such persons. In Chanakya's opinion, only
the intelligent and wise person will suffer in such a
relationship.

Relations of affection and attraction are appropriate
only with person of your status. The same also applies to
official relations. For business having good public dealings
and for home having a woman with superior qualities are
appropriate. So, a man should have relations in a society
with equals. Also only a government job offers stability, so it
should be preferred over other jobs. In business, your
success depends on public dealings and persuasiveness.
Similarly, for a home, a talented and educated woman is 
adorable. Therefore, a man should always observe the
above-cited things.

There is no one in this world in whose family or lineage,
there are no shortcomings or defects. A deep research will
expose some shortcoming or the other. Similarly, there is no
one in this world who is free from some illness or is totally
happy and prosperous. So, everyone is gripped with sorrow,
hardship, pain and illness. Nobody can escape from it.
Happiness or sorrow and ups or downs come and go in
everyone's life. So, a man should not feel helpless but face
it with courage.

A man's behaviour, his thought process is the
introduction to his family. From his speech, we can know
about his motherland, from his behavior, we can learn about
his attitude towards affection and respect and seeing his
body, we can know about his food. In other words, his
personality reflects his complete attitude. By observing a
man's personality, an intelligent person can judge his good
and bad qualities.

Expressing his opinion on an intelligent person,
Chanakya says that he should marry his daughter in a
respectable and suitable family. He should also provide the
best possible education to his son and involve his friends in
religious activities. It is necessary that the intelligent person
ensures that his enemies are always trapped in difficulties.
Then, they will never be able to create any hurdles or crisis
for him. Undoubtedly Chanakya has shown signs of his
political acumen in this shloka.

Comparing a snake and a wicked person, Chanakya says
that a snake bite is an unfortunate event. However, a
wicked person will betray you at every step and
unnecessarily hurts you. Therefore, if given a choice
between the two, choose the snake without any hesitation.

As intelligent and well-bred gentlemen do not abandon
anyone in adverse and difficult circumstances, kings and
scholars are always eager to shelter them. Such cultured
and wise persons have the capability to face adverse
circumstances with courage.

Praising intelligent persons, Chanakya says that inspite
of merger of several rivers into it, the sea remains calm but
when there is a storm, then it breaks all boundaries and
submerges large areas of the earth. But patient, mature and
wise gentlemen maintain their cool even in adverse
circumstances. That is, in any circumstance, they remain
patient and try to find ways to resolve it with determination.

A foolish person is like an animal with two legs. He can
neither differentiate between right and wrong nor can he be
taught anything. So, leave the company of such a person at
the earliest. Like a thorn in the feet, even if not visible, hurts
immensely, similarly, the foolish talk of a fool constantly
pricks gentlemen.

Through this shloka, Chanakya has highlighted the
importance of education. He says that as the fragrant and
beautiful flower of the Dhak tree butea frondosa is never
offered to gods/ goddesses, nor does it attract attention,
similarly an illiterate but attractive person born in upper
caste family cannot get respect. Looks, beauty, wealth,
property, power, status and youth become graceful only
when they are supported by education and wisdom.

On the importance of attributes, Chanakya says that like
the black colour of the koel bird (cuckoo) becomes
insignificant on account of its melodious voice; in other
words, its melodious voice depicts its character. Similarly,
loyalty towards her husband depicts a woman's image and
beauty. An educated and intelligent ugly woman is much
more beautiful than a gorgeous but a characterless woman.
The attributes give her respect and status. The greatness of
the hermit lies in his ability to forgive. Not losing their
balance and patience, under any circumstances is the proof
of their true devotion. These attributes enable assessment
of the depth of their devotion.

According to Chanakya, if it is possible to protect the
family by the relinquishment or sacrifice of one person, then
it should be accepted. Similarly, if you can protect your
village or society by the relinquishment or sacrifice of one
family, then it is entirely appropriate. To save your state, a
village or society can be sacrificed. But Chanakya also says
that nothing is more important than you. So, if you need to
sacrifice the whole world for your progress and protection,
then do so without any hesitation. If you are yourself not
there, then you have no use for your village, society or
state.

Persons, who are vigorous or hard-working, do not face
poverty; persons dedicated in praying are sinless; silence
does not lead to arguments, rather creates a peaceful
atmosphere. Similarly, a person, who is careful, alert and
aware, will be fearless and no one can harm him.

Chanakya says that the excess of anything or act is
harmful. According to him, Sita was kidnapped by Ravan
because she was extraordinarily beautiful. Having excessive
arrogance and ego caused the great scholar Ravan's death.
On account of his excessive generosity, the demon king Bali
lost everything and was sent to hell. It can, therefore, be
said without any doubt that excesses lead to the end of
man. So, avoid it.

No work is difficult or impossible for people who are
powerful, capable and courageous. They complete whatever
they resolve to do. For businessmen, no place is distant.
They do not delay visiting any place. For scholars, no place
is foreign. They are able to develop followers and friends on
the strength of their education, intelligence and wisdom.
Similarly, sweet talkers can convert even enemies to
friends. So, they do not have any enemies.

Praising virtuous persons, Chanakya says that like a
single tree with fragrant flowers makes the whole forest
aromatic, similarly, a single virtuous son born in the family
reforms it.

About a person devoid of any virtues, Chanakya says
that as a single tree on fire can burn an entire forest,
similarly, a virtueless son born in a status family can
disgrace it by his acts. So, can a minor shortcoming in a
scholar become a curse for him. Therefore, people should
implant good ideas and traits in their children.

As a single moon can dispel darkness-a job which
cannot be done, even by hundreds of stars, similarly, a
talented scholar, with character and soft speech, brings
pride to the whole family. Nobody likes a dark night;
similarly, a son devoid of any virtues is disliked by the
family. Therefore, Chanakya says that it is appropriate to
have a single virtuous son in the family rather than have
several virtueless sons.

In the context of a virtuous son, Chanakya says that a
notorious and virtueless son pushes the family towards grief
and dishonour, which leads to its ruin. On the contrary, a
virtuous son, by his knowledge, wisdom and learning, earns
place of pride, for the family in the society. Even though
Ravan had hundreds of sons and grandsons, but being
virtueless, they were all killed in the war. So, one virtuous
son is better than several virtueless sons. He opens the door
for the development and progress of the family.

On the responsibilities of a father towards his child,
Chanakya says that for the first five years, he must be
brought up with love and affection. For the next ten years,
he must be brought up with strict discipline, because this is
the period for the development of his personality. This
period is like the foundation on which will rest the rest of his
life. From the age of sixteen, he should be treated like a
friend; guide him like a friend; settle his problems like a
friend.

The person, who escapes frightful disturbances, riots,
attack by enemy, dreadful famines and company of wicked
people is capable of defending his life. Through this shloka,
Chanakya clarifies that for safe guarding his life, a person
should change according to his circumstances.

Religion, wealth, sex and salvation have been termed
as four important sects of life. Anyone, who does partake in
any one of these sects, is wasting his life. Without any of
these attributes, his life is like death, he has taken birth to
die and to be reborn again. So, a man should not philander
his precious life in sexual pleasures and luxury. Instead, he
must adopt good qualities and earn goodwill.

According to Chanakya, in a state where the fools are
not honoured, which is extraordinarily prosperous, in a
house where there are no arguments between husband and
wife, the presence of Goddess Lakshmi is certain. In such a
place, there is no dearth of anything. All the members of the
family live happily and harmoniously.

Stressing on the need to act in life, Chanakya says that
your age, activities, wealth, education and death is decided
when you are still in your mothers womb. These five things
are controlled by God; nobody can alter them. Yet man
should keep making efforts.

Chanakya says that when a person gets detached from
society or becomes indifferent to attachment/wealth and
becomes a saint, then his friends/relations, who see him off
away from home and come back, usually get involved in
attachment/wealth. But people, who adopt saintly practices
and entire family follows virtuous conduct, reform their
family.

About gentlemanly and saintly persons, Chanakya says
that like a fish raises her offsprings by sight, turtle by care
and birds by touch, similarly, the company of gentlemen
and qualified persons raises the level of common people.
Their company opens the doors to God. Therefore, people
should seek the company of saintly persons.

Describing religious activities and other good deeds,
Chanakya says that religious activities, charity/pilgrimage,
prayer/ worship and fasting/attending discourses, etc. open
the way to heaven. So for cleansing your soul, while you are
hale and hearty, you must perform all these activities as per
the proper practices, otherwise there will be nothing left
after death.

Sage Vashishtha had a cow named Kamdhenu, who
could fulfil all his desires immediately. Chanakya has
compared education to Kamdhenu. He says that like a
person possessing Kamdhenu will never die of hunger,
similarly, after attaining education, a man becomes capable
to face any crisis. In a foreign place, education is like your
mother, who will protect you at every step. Education is a
hidden treasure, which no one can steal; on the contrary,
the more you use it, the more it develops.

Like a single moon can dispel darkness which even lacs
of stars cannot do, a single bright and capable son is far
better than hundred unmerited sons.

Chanakya says that a foolish and illiterate person only
gives lifelong hardship and pain to his parents. It is,
therefore, fit that such a son expires at birth rather than
grow old. Even though it will grieve the parents for a short
term but at least they will not have to suffer lifelong. History
is also witness to several such foolish offsprings, who
destroyed the mighty empires.

Residing in a bad or disreputed place, serving people of
unknown background, eating bad food, a short-tempered
wife, a foolish son and a widowed daughter-Chanakya says
that these six reasons give heart rending pain like fire. So,
gentlemen should take all possible measures to set them
right.

There is no point in keeping a barren cow, which does
not give milk. Similarly, it is only right to relinquish an
illiterate and disobedient son; otherwise, the family will
have to bear untold hardships.

In this world, everyone is distressed by some sorrow.
Such a person can feel happiness and peace only in the
company of a virtuous son, loyal wife and gentlemen. So,
Chanakya has advised people to keep company of scholars
and gentlemen. According to him, humanities' happiness
lies there.

According to Chanakya, a king's order is like a
command and needs no repetition. Scholars and Pundits
stick to what they say. A daughter's hand is given away in
marriage once. So, any person, who wants do a good deed,
must do it in one go.

Chanakya has defined the number of people that must
be involved in doing different types of tasks. Meditation,
prayerofferings and learning of lesson should be done alone.
Involvement of more persons will create obstacles.
Contrarily, studies are better done by two persons together.
More than two persons will indulge in wasteful talk. For
singing, three persons are adequate, whereas for travel,
four persons are appropriate. For farming, five persons and
for war, the largest number of persons are required.

In the context of an ideal wife, Chanakya says that a
woman, who is pure, clever, wise; who is prudently devoted;
who only loves her husband; who always speaks the truth
and shuns lies, only that woman is respect/worthy and fit for
the home/family.

As a home is desolate without children, similarly, a
man feels lonely without friends and relations. But stupid,
poor and poverty-stricken men always have selfish motives,
so they do not have any feelings of love, affection or
sympathy. Therefore, they live in isolation as everyone stays
away from them.

According to Chanakya, without practice, even scholars
cannot recite manuscripts properly and will be mocked. For
them, this insult will be more painful than death. So, for a
scholar, who does not practise regularly, the manuscript is
like poison. Similarly, a person, whose digestion is weak or
who cannot digest food properly, even delicacies are like
poison for him. Because in meetings and seminars, the poor
person is always insulted, so for him such places are like
poison. For an aged person, a young wife is like poison. In
such circumstances, the young wife's behaviour is very
painful and insulting for the aged man.

Through this shloka, Chanakya cautions mankind to
never accept a religion, which is bereft of compassion; not
to consider a person as a Guru who is not a scholar; not take
an extremely short-tempered woman as a wife. Similarly,
never consider children, who lack affection; friends, who do
not value friendship, dear and trustworthy.

Regarding aging, Chanakya says that walking lost in
thought for long periods, keeping horses tied to their
holders, denying women sexual pleasures and drying
clothes in sun for very long signal the arrival of old age. So,
avoid them.

According to Chanakya, people should take precautions
regarding certain important matters. How are we doing, who
are our friends and foes, how is our residence, how much is
our income and expenditure, what is our strength-they must
focus on all these matters. People, who take care of all
these matters, are never unsuccessful.

Chanakya has considered the Mother who gives birth to
you, the Brahmin, who performs your religious thread
ceremony, the Guru, who teaches you, the person, who
feeds you and one who dispels fear, having the status of
your Father. He says man should be indebted to them and
should always respect/honour them. He is reborn again on
account of them.

Chanakya says that man has five mothers- the King's
wife, Guru's wife, friend's wife, wife's mother and your own
mother. He says man should extend due respect/honour to
them. Anyone, who shows evil intent against them or
disrespects them, goes to hell.

Brahmin, Kshatriya and Vaishya are born twice-once
from the mother's womb and, the second time, when they
attain knowledge from the Guru. They are, therefore, called
dual castes. Their idol is Sun God. In contrast, the Gods of
saints reside in their hearts. The Gods of people with limited
intelligence exist in statues. But for very broad-minded
people, the Gods exist in every particle in the world.

Regarding Guru, Chanakya says that for Brahmin,
Kshatriya and Vaishya, fire is like their Guru. Since the
Brahmin is superior amongst all the castes, so he is the
Guru for all. Similarly, for a woman, her husband is her
worship deity and Guru. But Chanakya has called the guest
as most respectful and worshipable. In this context, he says
that a guest only desires hospitality. He has no other vested
interest, so he is most superior.

Chanakya says that to test the purity of gold, it is
heated at high temperature; it is tapped, hammered and
cut. That gives it the glitter. Similarly, an honest person is
tested for purity by his acts of donation, good deeds,
virtuosity, sacrifice and behaviour. Any person, who
possesses all these qualities, glitters like gold.

How should an intelligent person act in a crisis-in this
context, expressing his opinion, Chanakya says that as long
as he is free of difficulties, worries and crises, he should fear
them. But once he is surrounded by them, then he should
face them fearlessly, courageously and patiently. Only then
can he defeat and escape from them.

Citing an example of diversity of human nature,
Chanakya says that berries and thorns growing on the same
tree and branch have different characteristics. The
consumption of berries gives a man sweetness and
satisfaction, whereas the pricking of thorns gives him pain
and irritation. Similarly, children born under the influence of
the same planet or born at the same time from the same
womb, have different characteristics. So a man should
understand this fully, only then can he attain peace.

On the character of a person, Chanakya says that a
person, who demands his rights, is greedy. A person, who
places importance on beauty and make-up, is lustful. Foolish
people by nature are not soft-spoken. Contrarily, persons
who are frank and truthful do not have even an iota of
cunning, deceit and craftiness.

Discussing human nature, Chanakya says that no one is
pleased to see anyone superior to him; rather he envies and
hates him. Foolish people hate scholars due to envy; so they
ill-treat them. On account of envy only, lazy and poor people
develop enmity towards the affluent. Similarly, prostitutes
envy loyal women and widows envy married women. Even
though such envious behaviour should be overlooked by
scholars from fools, affluent from poor, loyal women from
prostitutes and married women from widows, they also
mutually find faults to prove their superiority under the
influence of foolishness and envy.

According to Chanakya, laziness and irregular practice
corrupts the intelligence of scholars and ruins their
knowledge. Women under the influence of others are soon
ruined. Lack or shortage of seeds results in lower crop
output. Similarly, in the absence of the commander, the
army can never win a war. Thus, in order to get superior
results, the importance of regular practice must be
understood.

Chanakya says that only by constant practice,
knowledge can be retained. Similarly, only by his acts,
behaviour and nature, a man can attain honour, respect and
glory for his family. For this, being born in an upper caste,
having higher status and being rich is not material. Good
people are recognised by their traits, whereas eyes show
anger.

On the importance of wealth, meditation, soft speech
and loyal woman, Chanakya says that wealth safeguards
religion, meditation safeguards education, soft and gentle
speech safeguards the king and loyal woman safeguards the
household.

The person, who criticises knowledge of scriptures, the
superiority of manuscripts and truthful persons, faces
extreme hardships in this and other world. Such persons are
neither able to gain respect/honour in society or reap
benefits of their prayers after their death. The persons who
keep their company, also meet the same fate, in the same
measure.

In this shloka about donation, modesty, knowledge and
courtesy, Chanakya says that donation is an effective
means of alleviating poverty. Modesty eliminates
degradation and hardships. Knowledge ends a man's
stupidity and ignorance, whereas courtesy destroys a man's
fear. So, for living peacefully, a man should develop and
imbibe all the four qualities.

Describing disorders like lust, infatuation and anger in
a man's life, Chanakya says that lust is a man's most
powerful enemy. It is such an untreatable disease under the
influence of which a man loses his wisdom, as well as his
health deteriorates rapidly. Infatuation destroys a man like
an enemy. It was infatuation for a son which caused the
destructive war of Mahabharata. Similarly, anger is like a
wild fire, whose flames repeatedly singe man. It affects
man's mind/brain every moment. Chanakya says that
knowledge is the best weapon for destroying these
disorders. According to him, only knowledge can subdue
these disorders and lead to peaceful existence.

Inspite of having so many relations, friends, wife, son,
etc. in this world, a man is basically alone. He is born alone
and has to depart alone from this world. He alone has to
bear the consequences of all his good and bad deeds. He
has no partner in this. Happiness and sorrow are only his;
they will affect him only. He has to travel the life's journey
towards heaven alone.

For a Brahmin, who gives importance to acts, even the
pleasures of heaven are useless; whereas, for a Kshatriya,
who takes pride and feels honoured in taking risks, he is
least bothered about his life. Any man, who exercises
control over all his senses, remains unmoved by the
looks/beauty of a young woman. He is never affected by
disorders like lust, anger, greed, liquor, infatuation, etc.
Similarly, for a person, who is detached from worldly
matters and is without greed, even precious stones are like
straws.

Defining a true friend, Chanakya says that for a person
going abroad, education is his true friend and for the family,
a loyal wife is a true friend. For a sick person, his medicine
is a true friend. Since after death only a person's acts and
religious beliefs count, so religion is his true well-wisher.
Therefore, a man should perform good deeds while living, so
that he does not face hardships after death.

Explaining the purpose and benefits of donation,
Chanakya says that like rain serves no purpose over a sea, a
candle is useless in daylight, it is useless to feed a person
who is not hungry and give alms to a rich person. Chanakya
says that rain is required in fields and candle is required in
darkness; food must be fed to a hungry person and alms
must be given to the poor. One can only derive benefits
from such donations and good deeds.

Chanakya has considered rain water to be most pure
and pious from the viewpoint of health and usefulness.
Since your inner strength can control senses and body, so
he has considered the inner strength to be the most
superior. Animates see the world created by God through
their eyes, so there is no greater vision than eye-sight.
There is nothing more tasty and relishing than grain. It
satiates the mankind's hunger and gives him strength.
Mankind never tires of consuming it.

On diverse desires of different persons, Chanakya says
that poor and poverty-stricken persons desire wealth;
animals desire speech; ordinary persons are obsessed with
the idea of going to heaven; God men and hermits only seek
relinquishment. Similarly, mankind is distressed with having
some desire or the other and continuously thinks about it,
so much so that they even consider what they possess to be
inferior.

Explaining the power of truth, through this shloka,
Chanakya says that the foundation of a Brahmin's spirit/soul
is truth. This world is surviving on truth alone. The glow of
truth is illuminated in the form of the Sun in the sky. The
power of truth moves the air, brings about the changes of
day-night and the weather. Explaining the value of truth in
detail, Chanakya says that the power of truth has given
stability to this universe. The destruction of truth leads to
upheavals and the universe submerges under water.
Chanakya says that, therefore, mankind should believe in
truth and behave accordingly.

On religion, Chanakya says that even though this world
is destructible, religion can never be destroyed. Wealth,
youth life can be destroyed one by one. However, religion is
indestructible, immortal and eternal; nobody can destroy it.
Even though in his lifetime, man amasses invaluable
things/wealth and is surrounded by relations, after death, he
loses everything except religion. So, he must follow the path
of religion. The allurements of the worldly destructible
things distract him and try to divert him from the path of
religion, so he must sacrifice them. As the darkness is
dispelled by Sun's rays, similarly, practice of religion dispels
all the sorrows of man, in this as well as in the other world.

In this shloka, Chanakya has identified the cunning. He
says that amongst men, the barber is the most cunning.
Likewise, in birds, the crow, in animals, the jackal and in
women, the female gardener is most cunning and crafty.
They are always attempting to harm others. So, gentlemen
must avoid the company and friendship of such persons.

In this shloka, Chanakya has clarified the importance of
study and listening of the Vedic manuscripts. He says that to
understand the depth of religion, the knowledge of the Vedic
manuscripts is essential. Through them, man can imbibe the
essence of religion in life. Vedic knowledge can even move
the man's sin-filled mind towards righteousness. By its
influence, even an ordinary man can attain superiority. The
power of Vedic knowledge enables the saints to undertake
the welfare of the world and reach heaven after death.
Like the study of the Vedic manuscripts is extremely
beneficial, likewise listening to its recitation purifies the
mind. So, if the study of the manuscripts is not possible for
men, then they should listen to its recitation. This will
enable them to understand the Vedic knowledge in greater
depth.

On critics, Chanakya says that even though in birds the
crow, in animals the dog and a sinner saint are the most evil
and irreligious, the critic is even a greater sinner and of a
wretched nature. Even though the critic gains nothing by
criticising, he enjoys it. His sins keep adding up by criticising
and a day comes when his sins destroy him. So, Chanakya
has cautioned men against criticising.

On the pathetic condition of women, Chanakya has
written an appropriate shloka. He says that as by rubbing
ash a brass utensil shines, as dried mango powder purifies a
copper utensil, as a swiftly flowing river remains clean,
similarly, after menstruation, a woman becomes pure and
pious and is able to conceive. But women who don't have
menstruation or are unable or incapable to conceive, they
do not get due respect in the society.

In this shloka, Chanakya says that a king, a Brahmin and
an ascetic who tour are respected. On the contrary, a
woman who wanders around is considered corrupt and
immoral in the society. Explaining in detail, Chanakya says
that it is the duty of a king to know the difficulties being
faced by his people. How his officers behave with the people
and what actions they are taking for their welfare? So to get
first-hand information, he should travel incognito. If the
Brahmin keeps travelling, he is never short of followers. Also
his status in the society rises day by day. Travelling by saints
and ascetic enables them to spread their knowledge and
wisdom amongst the masses. Thus, the backward and
ignorant people who listen to them develop righteousness.
But for a woman, who travels without any purpose draws
herself closer to hell. Needy and resourceless women can
fall into bad company and loose their character and respect.
So, they should refrain from the travelling needlessly.

"What is destined cannot be changed by anybody": this
saying has often been heard in different sections of the
society from time immemorial. This saying illustrates the
superiority of fate and its impact. Chanakya has probably
written this shloka after a deep study of this saying. On his
thoughts about fate, he says that ones wisdom is dictated
by one's fate at birth. His life, actions, situations-everything
is decided by fate. He also gets relations and friends as
destined by his fate. Man gets only what he is destined to
get. But Chanakya also believes that man should not be
entirely dependent on fate. Man's duty is to make efforts, so
he should always strive to do so.

On time, Chanakya says that time or death is most
powerful. It is so powerful that it can destruct anything in
this universe in no time. Even when universal destruction
causes it to disappear under water, the time is ticking. Time
cycle is perpetually in motion. Against it even the most
knowledgeable persons, scholars and good souls become
helpless, the brave and bold Kshatriya are defeated. All the
four life stages of mankind conform to time. It is impossible
for everyone to win over time. It is, therefore, imperative
that mankind remains righteous and habitually performs
good deeds. Through good deeds only he can set right his
life in the next world.

A person born blind cannot see anything. But a person,
who is blinded by lust, also loses his ability to think inspite
of having vision that person acts in demeaning and
censurable manner in large gatherings. Similarly, a person
addicted to liquor is also categorised as blind. Intoxicated by
liquor, people lose their mental balance and their thinking
ability. On account of his useless and meaningless talk, he is
criticized and scoffed. Likewise, Chanakya has called a
selfish and sinning person blind. According to him, such a
person never thinks twice in causing hurt/loss to anyone, to
fulfil his selfish interests. For him, there is no difference in
sin and good deed. For him in front of his vested interest,
everything else is inferior.

As Lord Shri Krishna preached Arjuna in Gita on ones
deeds, likewise through this shloka, Chanakya in the avatar
of Krishna preaches the mankind in the avatar of Arjuna. He
says that everyone reaps according to his deeds, good or
bad. His deeds only bind him to wealth. He is born
repeatedly in this world in different forms according to his
deeds. Even though a man is free to act, he cannot reap as
he desires. Man can only control his actions; but only the
Lord has the power to reward him for his deeds. So, for his
salvation, a man must keep trying himself.

In the context of sins, Chanakya says that only the king
has to bear for the sins committed by his subjects. The sins
committed by the king are borne by the family priest. The
sins of the wife affect the husband and that of the student
affect the Guru. So Chanakya has stressed on the necessity
to contain the sins in the kingdom. According to him, it is
the duty of the king to eliminate all kinds of sins in his
kingdom; he should not allow the spread of arbitrariness
and evil. This will ensure that the people in his kingdom lead
a fearless life and the king shall reap its rewards. Thus, he
has stressed on the necessity to restrict sins and to
establish a religious reign.

Chanakya has composed this shloka to explain as to
who is the true enemy of man. According to him, a father,
who leaves debt on his children, is their true enemy. An
adulteress is the enemy of her children. Similarly, an
extraordinarily beautiful woman is the enemy of her
husband; a foolish and obstinate son ruins the father.
Contrarily, an industrious father, a religious mother, a loyal
wife and an intelligent son are all the true well-wishers of a
man. In fact, their support leads the man towards the
righteous path.

In this shloka, Chanakya has told of ways to control
diverse persons. He says that a person, who is greedy by
nature, can be controlled by allurement only. An obstinate
and arrogant person can be controlled by politeness. If a
foolish and brainless person's wishes are fulfilled, then he
can be easily controlled. To mould an intelligent person, he
must be made aware of the facts. Thus, after analysing the
weakness and the needs of a man, Chanakya has given the
Guru Mantras to control them.

A state in which sins and sinners abound, instead of
staying there, it is better to stay in an isolated place. It is
much better to be without a friend rather than have a
friend, who is untrustworthy, cunning and evil; because
such a friend will ruin you anytime. Similarly, it is much
better to be without a characterless pupil or an adulteress
wife. Such people are like coal that stain even gentlemen,
who provide them support. A person, who stays away from
them, is able to enjoy the pleasures of life.

In this shloka, Chanakya has expressed his invaluable
views on the king, friend, pupil and wife. He says that in a
kingdom, where the king is evil, unreligious and sinner, the
people can never live in peace. Therefore, people should
only reside in a kingdom whose king is righteous. It is
useless to expect support or affection from a friend, who is
deceitful and treacherous. Befriend only a person who is
able and trustworthy. You can never expect love and
pleasure from a woman, who is disloyal and cunning.
Therefore, you must marry a woman who is well-mannered
and from a wellbred family. It will enhance the pleasures of
married life. Similarly, characterless and irreligious pupils
will always bring defame. It is much better not to have
them.

In the scriptures, it is stated that man should gracefully
accept learning, from wherever he gets it. Chanakya agrees
with it. Through this shloka addressing man, Chanakya says
that God has definitely given some quality or the other to
every living thing. So, any qualities of even foolish persons
or animals should be accepted without any hesitation or
shame. He says that man should accept one quality each
from lion and stork, three from donkey, four from cock, five
from crow and six from dog.

According to Chanakya, the lion is gifted with an
important quality, which man should imbibe. He says that if
a man takes responsibility for any work, then he should fulfil
it with sincerity and courage. However, before taking up the
responsibility, a man should introspect on his strengths and
weaknesses. Thereafter, he should make efforts to complete
it with full sincerity and wisdom. This will bring him fame
and respect. Contrarily, men who dither to complete the
assumed work or misguide others, nobody trusts them
again.

The stork has the quality of concentration and
patience. In this shloka, Chanakya has suggested imbibing
this quality. He says that like the stork focuses patiently its
sights on its prey and expels all other thoughts from its
mind, an intelligent and wise person should control all his
senses, focus and complete his work. This will ensure
hundred per cent success.

Chanakya has stressed intelligent and wise persons on
imbibing four qualities from the cock. Getting up at a fixed
time; being ever ready for a fight; sharing fairly with friends/
relations and sexually satisfying its hen. Like the cock rises
early daily and attends to its chores, similarly, a man should
also rise early and attend to his chores. While on one hand,
it will keep him healthy, on the other, he will be able to
complete his tasks on time. It is in the nature of the cock to
be ever ready for a fight. So, a man should also be ready to
fight his enemies with full courage. The cock believes in
sharing. Accordingly, a man should also give away
everyone's share at the right time. The denial or lack of
sexual pleasures drives a woman towards disloyalty.
Therefore, like the cock, a man should keep his wife sexually
satisfied, so that she remains loyal.

Chanakya has stated that the crow is gifted with five
qualities-performing sex in private; being wicked and
adamant; having nature to store; never being lazy and
never trusting anyone-which a man should imbibe. Like the
crow has sex in private, man should also have sex in
private. This ensures he retains his esteem and respect. To
repel his enemies man should learn the wickedness and
obstinacy of the crow. He can then destroy his enemies. The
nature to store can pull man through difficult times with
determination and courage. The crow is never lazy, so, a
man should shun his laziness and concentrate on his tasks.
This will ensure his success. Never trusting anyone is the
strongest quality of the crow. If a man adopts this, then he
protects himself fully and nobody can harm him.

Having a large appetite, being satisfied with less in
adversity, having a sound sleep, remaining alert even while
sleeping, facing the enemy with loyalty and courage-the dog
has these six qualities. Chanakya says that these six
qualities are superlative for a man. He says that if a man
imbibes these qualities, then he remains fit as well as he
experiences mental peace and contentment.

According to Chanakya, even the symbol of
foolishness, the donkey, has three qualities. Toiling
tirelessly, not being bothered by hot or cold weather, being
patient and contented-the presence of these qualities
makes a man's life worthwhile. A man should tirelessly work
like a donkey. This will ensure his success. Not being
bothered about hot or cold weather will condition his body
and he will always remain fit. Similarly, by being patient and
contented, he can care for his family even with less and be
happy.

In conclusion, Chanakya says that anyone who adopts
all the twenty qualities, his life will be filled with happiness
and success. He will be able to enslave happiness and
continue to rise in life.

Chanakya believes that endurance is an essential quality
in an intelligent person. According to him, a person should
not reveal to anyone sorrow of loss of his wealth, having an
evil wife or being insulted by anyone else. For this, he must
be enduring. Endurance will save him from humiliation in
front of others. Therefore, he must imbibe the endurance
quality and bear all the above adversities quietly.

In this shloka, Chanakya clarifies that those people, who
hesitate in the activities of buying-selling, teaching, eateries
and money lending, will face lot of problems and difficulties.
It is, therefore, appropriate that people involved in the
above-cited activities should never hesitate.

There is no end to a man's desires and lusts. The
fulfilment of one's desire leads to creation of several other
desires. Gradually, these desires overpower him and draw
him towards a sinful life. A man should imbibe the two
qualities of patience and contentment. These will ensure
that he is at peace with himself and is satisfied. This is the
simplest and easiest path to attaining happiness in life. In
contrast, people, who are greedy and have vested interests,
never experience true happiness during their lifetime. They
are always under mental stress and remain disturbed. So, a
man should stay away from such traits.

A woman, food and wealth provide tremendous
satisfaction to man. Chanakya also accepts this fact. He
says that one's wife, even if she is ugly or beautiful, evil or
amiable, foolish or intelligent-should not be deserted. If he is
satisfied with her, then he will be free from mental tension
forever. A man should never reject food just because it is
not tasty. He should gladly accept whatever food he gets, be
it simple or fit for royals. Similarly, he should feel satisfied
with whatever he earns through labour. In addition,
Chanakya also advises man to stay ahead in donating,
praying and learning.

Chanakya says that it is important that you should not
pass between two people in discussion. He says that there is
the fear of a calamity if you pass through two Brahmins,
Brahmin and his prayer fire, a couple, employer and his
employee and bull and plough. You should side step, instead
of passing through.

Chanakya says that fire, guru, Brahmin, cow, girl, aged
and child must be respected and honoured. Therefore, they
must never be touched with your feet. Anyone doing so is a
fool and comes to grief.

Friendship with an evil person is very damaging and full
of pitfulls falls. So man should stay away from his company.
Chanakya expressing his view, says that it is in your interest
if you stay five steps away from a bullock cart, ten steps
away from a horse and hundred steps away from an
elephant. But Chanakya has considered an evil person even
more dangerous than all of them. So, he has suggested that
a gentleman should not hesitate to even leave the country
to stay away from an evil person, otherwise, he cannot
escape from his downfall for long.

On the tendency and ways to control an evil person,
Chanakya says that like an elephant is controlled by an iron
hook, horse by a whip and horned animals by a stick, to
control an evil person, one needs to use a sword. Explaining
in detail, Chanakya says that an evil person has a very low
mentality. He is always eagerly scheming to harm others. It
is impossible to change such people by love, affection and
knowledge. There are instances when the evil person even
crosses all limits. In such circumstances, a gentleman
should use the sword for his selfdefence.

A Brahmin loves his food, so ample delicious food gives
him fulfilment. A peacock is pleased to see the clouds; its
thundering prompts it to dance. This dancing satisfies it. A
gentleman is never jealous of others grandeur, opulence,
progress and happiness, rather he is satisfied with their
meager means. On the other hand, an evil and cruel person
is satisfied in harming others. They feel elated seeing others
in crisis.

In this shloka, Chanakya reveals an important strategic
saying. It also has a hidden meaning. He says that a strong
person cannot be won over by force. You should control him
by conduct favourable to him. An evil enemy should be
defeated by adopting conduct unfavourable to him.
Whereas an equal enemy can be won over by a combination
of humility and force.

What is the true strength of man? By which inner
strength can a man make others bow before him? In this
context, Chanakya's statement has lot of depth. He says
that a king's strength lies in his arms, with which he
destroys his enemy. A Brahmin's strength is inherent in his
knowledge of the scriptures, through which he can defeat
even the greatest scholar. A woman's strength lies in her
beauty, youth and sweet talk. Even while being delicate,
through them she has the power to make any one bow
before her. So, a man should understand his strengths
completely.

The current time is very difficult for simple and
gentlemanly persons. Any clever person with selfish interest
easily cheats them. This shloka appropriately deals with
such a situation. Through this shloka, Chanakya advises
simple and gentlemanly persons that sometimes their
simplicity and righteousness can become a curse for them.
Their simplicity is exploited by evil and selfish persons. For
this, they do not even hesitate to harm them. Citing an
example, he says in the forest only the trees, which grow
straight are cut and nobody bothers about trees which grow
in a haphazard manner. So, a man should not be so simple
that people easily exploit him.

In this shloka, comparing the selfish person with a
swan, Chanakya says that only when there is water in the
pond, the swans stay and build their nests on the bank. But
when the pond dries, they break all the attachments and fly
away. The selfish person also behaves in the same fashion.
Till his vested interest is not fulfilled, he remains with his
provider and showers his affection. Once his vested interest
is fulfilled, he leaves his provider. So, a man should not be
selfish like the swan. If he stays with him in good times,
then he should also support with determination in adversity.

Excessive wealth not only corrupts a man's mind but
also makes him greedy and selfish. Clarifying this saying,
Chanakya says that if in time the still water in a pond is not
changed, it rots and becomes useless. In order to retain its
usefulness, it should run continuously. Similarly, the
amassed wealth must be circulated by donation. This not
only earns esteem/ respect for a man in this world, it also
opens doors for ensuring happiness in the other world.

The importance, influence and usefulness of wealth
has been established for centuries. Even Chanakya accepts
that wealth is more important than intelligence and
knowledge. Explaining it, he says that even if someone is
short on knowledge/ wisdom but has unlimited wealth, he
will be respected in the society. In contrast, a poor but
knowledgeable, intelligent and wise person is looked down
upon. The power of wealth is so great that even unfamiliar
persons develop relationship, whereas poverty even drives
away relations. The paucity of wealth leaves you alone in
adversity. It is only wealth which gains man the highest
respect in society.

On identifying great persons, Chanakya says that they
have the four combined qualities of donating, sweet talk,
praying and respecting scholars. He is ever ready to donate;
his speech is sweet at all times; his psyche is fully devoted
to God and he always respects scholars.

On identifying the evil persons, Chanakya says that
they have extreme anger, they always utter poisonous
speech, they are ever ready to cause harm to
friends/relations, they keep the company of evil men and
they work for contemptible men. Such persons bear
extreme hardships of hell, even while living in this world.
Poverty and being characterless are their other ill qualities.

On the positive effects of being in the company of
great men, Chanakya says the forehead diamond of the
elephant could be found in the cave of the lion, but only
bones and meat will be found in the abode of the jackal.
Similarly, one can learn a lot in the company of gentlemen.
Contrarily, the company of evil men will only lead to
misdeeds and crime.

Chanakya has stressed on the importance of education.
He has compared an illiterate person to a dog's tail. He says
that as a dog cannot cover his vitals or get rid of
flies/mosquitoes with his tail, similarly, a foolish and
illiterate person cannot properly take care or protect his
family. So, a man should gain knowledge instead of craving
for food and wealth.

Having the spirit of looking after the welfare of others
and kindness only can purify a person. In the absence of this
spirit, purifying your mind, speech or senses has no
meaning. Elaborating further, Chanakya says a person
taking care of the welfare of others is pure in the true sense.
The soul of such person does not get corrupted even in bad
company.

Even though flowers have fragrance, seeds have oil,
wood burns, milk contains ghee and sugarcane is sweet, all
these things are not visible. Similarly, in the case of men,
the soul is present in the body but cannot be seen.
However, it can be felt by wisdom. So, a man should
enlighten it by wisdom.

According to Chanakya, evil and cruel persons have the
lust for wealth. To obtain it, they do not hesitate even to
adopt any despicable means. Their sole objective is to get
wealthy. Even though middle-income people also consider
wealth to be important, but for them, their esteem/respect
is also equally important. So, even though they have the
lust to become wealthy, they hesitate to adopt despicable
means. Whereas for righteous persons, their esteem/respect
is most important. So, to retain it, they even refuse the most
valuable thing.

In this shloka, Chanakya describes the relaxations
granted to sick and hungry persons in the scriptures. He
says that water, sugarcane, milk, vegetables, beetle leaf,
fruits and medicines have been classified as most pure
substances in the scriptures. So, they can perform religious
rites, even after consuming them. There will be no
impediment.

Chanakya most definitely accepts the fact that good/bad
qualities and conduct of the parents' influence their
children. He says even though a lamp dispels darkness, its
soot is black. Similarly, the type of food a man consumes,
his children will like that. Elaborating this, Chanakya says
that if a person is a cheat, characterless and evils pirited,
then his children will also possess these ill qualities. Against
this, a gentleman's children will be intelligent, simple,
honest and tolerant. Therefore, a man should always imbibe
good qualities.

Even though Chanakya has stressed on the obligation to
donate, he says that it should not be given to everyone. In
this context, he says that as the clouds absorb water from
the sea and release it as lifegiving rain over the fields, the
same water multiples manifold and merges back into the
sea. Similarly, if donation is given to a person who is
tolerant, learned, honest and a gentleman, then it is
received back a hundred times. However, it should never be
given to a person who is lazy, evil, jealous of others,
immoral and a sinner, otherwise such a donation will be a
waste.

Chanakya cautions that it is in the interest of a man to
stay away from the company of a degenerated and evil
person. If possible, he should not even come face-to-face
with him. In the scriptures also, the Rishi-Munis have
compared such persons to a hundred devils. According to
him, an evil person is extremely dangerous, degenerated
and unfaithful. Merely being in their company can cause
several crises and sorrows.

In the Hindu scriptures, bathing has been described as
an important and purifying act. In this context, Chanakya
says that after oil massage, visit to the crematorium, mating
and shaving, a man's body becomes impure. Bathing is the
act which purifies him again, so after the above-cited acts, it
is essential to take bath. It is also healthy. However, one
must not bathe immediately after mating, as it is not
healthy.

On drinking water, Chanakya says that the stomach is
an important organ. It is the stomach which controls your
fitness. It is, therefore, essential that a man should keep his
digestion in order. In case of indigestion, water acts as a
medicine. So, drink a lot of water, but do so before taking
food or after digestion of the food. If water is taken
immediately after taking food, it acts like slow poison and
deteriorates the body.

Old age has been described as the man's most pathetic
and difficult stage of life. At this age, the wife's death,
usurping of one's wealth by close relations and being
dependent for food- these three things are extremely
painful. He says that wife is a true companion in old age and
her absence makes a man completely helpless. If a man has
wealth in old age, he does not have to be dependent on
others for food. So, to avert this pathetic state, a man
should save wealth.

According to Chanakya, getting the knowledge from
the Vedas, without performing yagna/havan is useless. Also
if after the yagna, the honorarium is not paid, all the
benefits of the yagna are negated. Through these
statements, Chanakya wishes to clarify that a man cannot
get success in any task, if he does not have full faith in it. In
other words, only that task is successful, which is done with
mental dedication and sacrifice. So, a man should do all the
auspicious and virtuous tasks with full dedication and
sacrifice.

It is the practice in the Hindu Dharma to pray before
the idols of God made of wood, stone or metal. Chanakya
believes that a man can pray before idols of God made of
any material, but it is necessary to have true dedication and
reverence. In fact, only on account of this faith, God resides
in man's heart and he feels the presence of God in
inanimate objects and attains salvation.

Believing in the idols of God made from wood, stone
and metal to be the true form of God and praying before
them results in God's blessings. In other words, God does
not exist in inanimate objects but in your faith. That is why,
it is said that you cannot get salvation without dedication
and faith.

Chanakya has written this shloka using his entire life's
experience. He says that in this world, there is no greater
devotion than peace, greater happiness than contentment
and sickness than greed. Likewise feeling for others' sorrows
and being ever ready to help are man's true duties. In other
words, a man should shun anger and bear all difficulties
peacefully. Such actions of a man are comparable to the
severe devotions of ascetics. Man should be satisfied with
whatever means he possesses. Contentment alone will give
him complete happiness whereas sickness like greed will
even deprive him of actual happiness. Praying to God and
visiting religious places are not the only duties of a man,
serving others and humanity are his true duties.

Anger completely ruins a person. Anger is the image of
the God of death, who is ever ready to grasp the person in
its hideous jaws. Under its influence, the person loses his
senses and it leads him to perform despicable acts. It is said
that in the journey to the other world, on the way is a river
named Vaitarni. It is very painful for the soul to cross it.
Chanakya has compared greed to the Vaitarni river and he
says that, a man should make all efforts to stay away from
greed. He has compared education to the 'Kamdhenu cow'
which fulfills all wishes. He says that a man, who learns, is
certain to get all his wishes fulfilled. Similarly, Chanakya has
compared contentment to Lord Indra's abode, Nandan
forest, which is pleasing and charming. So, he has stressed
on living in contentment.

According to Chanakya, beauty is enhanced by good
qualities, whereas the grace of the dynasty lies in morality.
The test of your education is through your ability to create
wealth and the value of money rises by using it. Elaborating
this, Chanakya says that even if you are very beautiful and
youthful but without any qualities, then you will face insult
and disregard. A person's behaviour decides the superiority
of his dynasty. If a man believes in righteousness, then his
dynasty will get appropriate respect/ regard in the society.
Any learning through which you cannot earn money is
useless. If wealth is only amassed and not used, then it
loses its importance.

Improper behaviour ruins beauty. If you lose your
morality, then your dynasty will be defamed. Similarly,
without full involvement, you cannot attain success in any
task and misuse of money leads to its dissipation.

Water stored in the depths of the earth, a loyal woman,
a welfare-inclined king and a content Brahmin-Chanakya has
called these four utmost pure. According to him, the water
stored in the earth contains minerals, so it is healthy.
Nobody is as radiant as a loyal woman. Even Gods
acknowledge her. A welfare-inclined king is always
concerned about the welfare and good of his people. He is
considered as a great person. Honorarium paid to a content
Brahmin is received back manifold. So, a man must respect
everyone.

A discontented Brahmin, an unambitious contented
king, a shameful prostitute and a shameless status woman
Chanakya has called these four to be extremely damaging
for a man. He says that a discontented Brahmin can never
earn respect in the society. An unambitious king can never
be concerned about the welfare and progress of his people.
As a result, pretty soon his enemies ruin his kingdom. Any
shameful prostitute can never satisfy her clients. As a result,
they shun her and in the end, she dies of hunger. In
contrast, a shameless status woman falls in bad company
and ruins herself and her family.

In this shloka, Chanakya enlightens on the importance
of learning. He emphatically says that in the absence of
learning and good qualities, even a person born in an upper
caste is mocked. Against this, a person born in lower caste
with learning and good qualities, attains status in the
society. In other words, it is not enough to be born in an
upper caste to attain greatness. It is necessary for him to be
tolerant, patient, learned and welfare minded.

Explaining the importance of education, Chanakya says
that only scholars are praised everywhere; they get
fame/respect from every place. They get all the happiness
because of education. In fact, all over the world, education
is worshipped; nothing is more valuable. Therefore, a person
under them is also respected in the society. So, a man must
get educated. This will open the doors of progress for him.

Chanakya has compared men who eat meat, drink
liquor, are foolish or are illiterate, to animals. He says such
men behave like animals. They do not contribute anything
to society and state, but bad qualities. You cannot expect
welfare or gentlemanly behaviour from them. They are only
excessive weight on the earth. Their life is a waste.

In Hindu scriptures, performing yagya/havan, on
auspicious occasions has been considered very important.
Lord Brahma has compared it to the kalpavriksha which
fulfills all the wishes of a man. This saying has been
accepted by Chanakya also. But he argues that if while
performing the yagna there is deficiency of any kind in its
ceremony/arrangement, then its effects can turn
negative/causing difficulties. So, while performing the yagna
grains should be donated, the hymns should be recited
according to procedure and the priests should be given
proper honorarium. If this does not happen then the yagna
can cause ruin. So, yagna should only be performed when
the capability to perform it as per the correct procedures
exists.

In this shloka, Chanakya preaches willing persons, the
ways to attain salvation. He says that if a man wants
release from the cycle of life-death and attain salvation,
then he should completely abandon perversions like sex,
anger, greed, allurement and arrogance. These perversions
are like poison for man. Under their influence, a man
remains tied to affection/wealth for life. Instead of these
perversions, a man should imbibe qualities like forgiveness,
simplicity, patience, politeness, honesty, generosity,
welfare, mercy, truth, love and purity. This enables him to
be free of all sinful acts and attain salvation.

Persons who expose others secrets, Chanakya has called
them degenerated, meddlesome and evil. He says that such
persons initially feel elated by insulting one or the other,
later they are ruined like a snake trapped in an ant hill.
People should stay away from them.

Like gold does not have fragrance, sugarcane is not a
fruit and sandalwood does not flower, similarly, scholars are
not wealthy nor do the kings have long life. The creator of
the universe did what he thought best. Had he taken care of
the above-cited deficiencies, then it would have been much
better for the world. But a change in any manner in the
universe's laws is not possible.

In this shloka, Chanakya clarifies that there is no
medicine as pure and life bestower as nectar. It cures all
ailments. So, in medicines, nectar is most superior. Eyes are
the most important senses amongst all the senses. Through
these a man is able to see the God's beautiful creation. In
their absence, life is filled with darkness. Likewise, the brain
controls the man's body, without it, the body is useless.

According to Chanakya, those who discovered the solar
and lunar eclipse are also called scholars. For this, they
didn't send any emissary in space nor discussed it with
anyone. They studied the facts of the space, researched
them and gained all the knowledge, staying on the earth
itself. This clearly shows that scholars are able to
understand the inner thoughts of others without saying
anything. Nothing remains a secret in front of their
intelligence and knowledge.

A student, employee, traveller, hungry person, scared
person, storekeeper and doorman-can only complete their
tasks while remaining awake.
So, Chanakya says that if you find them sleeping, awaken
them. On awakening, the student can complete his studies
and the employee will be able to complete his task on time.
Likewise on awakening the traveller, he will be able to
protect his wealth, as well as will be able to reach his
destination quickly. After awakening, feed the hungry and
reassure the scared. The job of the storekeeper is to protect
the store and the guard to police the house while remaining
awake. If they sleep, then thieves and dacoits will rule the
roost. So, they also must be awakened.

In the above shloka, Chanakya has talked about
awakening certain people. In this shloka, he prohibits
awakening some living beings. He says not to awaken a
snake, king, lion, wild boar, child, fool, honebee and other's
dog, otherwise he will face great hardships. These beings
are better off sleeping.

Chanakya has called a Brahmin who only uses his
knowledge to earn wealth, useless for the society. His being
or not being in the society is of no consequence. He will
never be known for his intelligence and knowledge in the
world.

Any person, whose anger has no impact and his
happiness does not benefit anyone, such a person's
behaviour cannot influence anyone. You should not expect
any sympathy or favour from such a person. This person
only exists for himself and he is not concerned with anyone
else.

In this shloka, Chanakya displays his diplomatic
prowess. Approving showmanship of strength and influence,
he says that like people are scared of a hissing snake, even
though he may not be poisonous, similarly, a person without
any influence must create influence in the society by
showmanship. People may not be aware that the snake is
not poisonous; similarly, people are scared of showmanship.
In such a situation, the person is never mocked.

Discussing the daily activities of a fool and an
intelligent person, Chanakya says that a fool's day starts
with gambling. In the afternoon, they mate and their nights
are spent in robbing or other sinful activities. Against this a
gentleman's, and intelligent person's day starts with good
deeds and the whole day is spent in other's welfare. So, a
man should use his time purposefully like a gentleman.

On performing religious ceremonies, Chanakya says
that a man can reap the benefits of pleasing the God, if he
performs all the religious ceremonies himself. Making the
flower garland and placing on the Gods idol himself,
applying the self-made sandalwood paste and reciting the
self-written hymns in the praise of God, etc. will enable him
to obtain God's grace. In contrast, if he gets all these
ceremonies done through a servant, then the benefits will
accrue to the servant. So, a man should perform all the
religious ceremonies himself.

The more you subject to pressure the sugarcane,
oilseeds, shudra (person of the lowest caste), woman, gold,
earth, sandalwood, curd and betel leaf, the more qualities
they develop. The more you crush sugarcane and oilseeds
you will get more juice and oil. The tougher stand you take
to educate a shudra and a woman, the more quickly they
will learn. The more intensely gold is heated, the more it
shines and becomes purer. The better the earth is ploughed,
the better is the yield. Similarly, the more you rub
sandalwood, curd and betel leaf, the more you enhance
their qualities.

Chanakya says that you must be satisfied with
whatever you have. A poor man should be patient. This will
enable him to endure the difficulties of his poverty, with his
limited resources. Even if he keeps his cheap clothes neat
and clean, he will be able to improve his appearance. Even
if he eats his frugal food hot, it will be tasty. Similarly, if a
wise and intelligent person is ugly looking, he will not face
impediments. So, a man should look for ways to be happy
and satisfied, even in the above-cited circumstances.

According to Chanakya, no wealth is greater than
education. Accepting this important fact, he says that a
person without wealth is not poor, but a person without
wisdom and education, is truly poor. Even a fool can earn
wealth, but only a few fortunate get educated. A wealthy
fool cannot earn respect/repute for himself. However, a poor
scholar can attain a respectable place in the society.
Therefore, getting educated has more value than earning
wealth, so a man should always make efforts for gaining it.

Through this shloka, Chanakya has cautioned man to
act only after due consideration; like drinking water after
filtering it through a cloth sieve. That is, he should talk in a
sweet tone and behave politely with everyone. That will
ensure that he never stumbles and faces defeat in life.
Clarifying, Chanakya says that a man's behaviour is enough
to make people bow before him. Even enemies can be won
over.

According to Chanakya, there are lot of obstacles and
difficulties in getting education. So, the students, who desire
pleasure, should shun the idea of getting education. The
paths to enjoying physical pleasure and getting education
are separate. To attain both simultaneously is impossible.
Whereas, on one hand, physical pleasure is pleasing and
delightful, on the other hand, getting education is like
performing a severe religious austerity. To obtain it, one
needs to do self-mortification like gold is heated. So, one
must choose only one, with due consideration.

Chanakya says that a poet's imagination is limitless, it
is impossible to fathom it by an average person. It is beyond
anyone to enter the palace of his imagination. Likewise,
men are unaware of the true power of women. It is difficult
to imagine what a woman can do if she becomes obstinate.
A drunkard loses control over his speech. So, it is difficult to
predict how he will behave. Even the crow does not know
what he should eat or what he should not eat. In other
words, it is not possible to know any living beings' limit. In
times of crisis, a man can cross any limits.

Extolling the supremacy of fate, Chanakya says that it
is impossible for anyone to overrule it. It is the miracle of
fate which can make a king to become a pauper and a
pauper to become a king. Whatever God has in store for a
man, he has to bear the consequences accordingly. The fate
cannot be altered in any manner. Consequently, certain
events can occur in a man's life, which no one can predict.
So, as far as possible a man should perform good deeds. His
forbidding cannot be dispelled, but its impact can be
minimised.

It really hurts a greedy person to give money, so he
considers anyone who asks for alms, charity or donation as
his enemy. Likewise, a knowledgeable preacher cuts short a
fool and tries to instill knowledge in a him. So, a fool
considers him as his enemy. For a disloyal wife, her husband
is like an enemy, because he tries to restrict her
independence. The thieves find it difficult to burgle in a
moonlit night, so they consider it their enemy. In other
words, through this shloka, Chanakya clarifies that evil
persons consider everyone who follows the path of
righteousness, as their enemy; yet gentlemen continue on
their righteous paths.

As the bamboos inspite of being surrounded by
sandalwood trees, growing on Malyachal Mountain, are not
as fragrant as them, do not develop the characteristics of
sandalwood, similarly, a fool in the company of scholars
cannot become a scholar. Explaining this, Chanakya says
that a person who does not have the ability to
think/understand, who is not eager to learn, cannot be
taught inspite of best efforts. Any preaching to such persons
is a waste. For that, a man should be curious.

Chanakya says that mirror was made for people having
vision. They can see themselves in it. But for the blind, it
serves no purpose. You cannot blame the mirror for it.
Similarly, the Vedas/ scriptures were created and for
intelligent and wise people. They are beneficial only for
people, who have thinking and understanding ability. Fools
cannot benefit from them.

Explaining the nature of an evil person, Chanakya says
that as by repeated washing, your excreting parts cannot be
cleansed, similarly, even by numerous preaching of wisdom,
the nature of the evil person cannot be changed. All efforts
to reform them fail.

In this shloka, Chanakya has cited the consequences
of envy. He says that the person, who is envious of saints,
soon meets his death. Being envious of your enemy results
in death and loss of wealth. Being envious of the king
results in death, loss of wealth and respect. Likewise, being
envious of the Brahmin results in death-loss of wealth
respect, along with ruin of his entire family. So, a man
should always get the blessings from gentlemen. His
blessings will enhance his wealth and bring prosperity for
his family. He will also live long and enjoy all the pleasures
of life.

Through this shloka, Chanakya has called that a wise
person, who on becoming poor, instead of staying with his
relations, prefers to stay in the forest amidst wild animals
like lion, elephant, tiger, etc. in a tree house, eats fruits and
roots, drinks water, sleeps on a grass mattress and covers
himself with leaves. Explaining this, Chanakya says that on
becoming poor, a person may be mocked on several
occasions. Such a situation is extremely stressful and can
cause mental tension. Nobody supports him when he
becomes poor. So, it is wise to leave and stay in the forest.

Giving a form to the imaginary eternal tree, Chanakya
says that the Brahmin is eternal tree on the earth. Prayers
are its roots and Vedas its branches. Religious ceremonies
are its beautiful leaves growing on the branches. He says
that roots of the tree are most important, as the tree
survives on the roots. If the roots weaken or die, its does not
take long for the tree to dry. So, the root must be duly
protected.

In this shloka, Chanakya says that anyone whose
mother is Goddess Lakshmi, father is Lord Vishnu and the
worshippers are classified as his relations, such a person is
most superior. For him, all the three worlds are like his
country-it is as if he owns all the three worlds. But to attain
such a state, a man should possess the qualities of
gentlemanliness, benevolence, tolerance and charity.

Chanakya has explained the concept of life and death
in a very simplistic manner. He says that a crow, pigeon,
sparrow and parrot-even though being of different species
and colour, sleep on the same tree in the night. But at the
crack of dawn, they all fly away to their own destinations.
Similarly, the human souls also settle for some time in
families, in the form of trees. Then at the appointed hour,
they fly away from that tree. So, one should not grieve or
feel sorrow on their departure. This is the law of the nature
and the entire universe is guided by it. Even the creator of
this world, Lord Brahma cannot change it.

Chanakya says that in the hour of need, only the
intelligent man can effectively use his strength. Even
though it might be less, his strength is significant.
Contrarily, a fool's strength may be immense but it is
useless, as in the absence of intelligence, he will never be
able to use it effectively. So, it is more important to have
intelligence rather than more or less strength. It is only
using his intelligence a rabbit killed a lion, by making him
jump into the well.

Through this shloka praying before Lord Vishnu,
Chanakya says that it is only Lord Vishnu who provides food
to the
whole world. So, he is called the provider. Had he not been
the provider, there would be no milk in the breasts of a
mother, at the time of birth of the child. Oh Shri Vishnu! Oh
Lord! For your greatness, I, Chanakya, bow before you and
fold my hands a thousand times. But here Chanakya also
clarifies that even though man should have full faith in God,
he should not shy away from his efforts. God will fulfil his
wishes, only if he also makes the effort.

In this shloka, Chanakya has expressed his desire to
learn and understand other languages in addition to
Sanskrit. He says that even after drinking nectar, the Gods
impatiently desire to kiss the Apsaras, similarly even after
entirely learning the Sanskrit language, I have the yearning
to learn the other superior languages of the world, because
after learning these languages, I will attain the due
respect/honour in the world. This shloka of Chanakya aptly
applies in the present times.

According to Chanakya, the addition of ghee in the
food provides maximum strength and nourishment. He says
that in comparison to wheat, its flour provides ten times
more strength. Milk contains ten times more strength than
flour. Meat provides eight times more strength than milk.
But ghee is the best. Its regular intake provides immense
strength. So, it must be consumed in the right measure in
food.

On food products, Chanakya says that excessive
consumption of vegetables, etc. invites diseases, whereas
milk helps in the development of the body. Ghee enhances
strength and sperm; meat deposits fat. So, man should
consume more milk and ghee as compared to vegetables
and meat. Against it, consumption of vegetables and meat
will deform the body.

Chanakya has included charitable nature, sweet talk,
patience and the knowledge of right-wrong amongst the
superior traits. But he says that man is born with these
traits. When a child is born, these traits are present in him
instinctively. It is impossible for a person to develop them by
practice.

Man's relations are truly his supporters. If he leaves
them and rushes towards others, he is ruined very soon, like
a king is ruined on account of his unholy behaviour. He
clarifies that like the king, who turns away from his religion,
is definitely ruined, any person, who gives up his religion
and is attracted towards another religion, inspite of being
affluent, is ruined. So, a man should never be indifferent to
his religion.

Through this shloka, Chanakya has proved the
superiority of wisdom, cleverness, radiance and strength
over size. He says that a huge elephant is controlled by a
small iron hook; a lamp's small flame dispels darkness; a
hammer can break huge mountains. In other words, a man
who is wise, clever, radiant and strong, can overcome even
the most difficult problems. The superiority is not in size but
inherent in these four qualities.

It is told in the scriptures that after the completion of
the Dark Age, the period of total destruction will commence.
In the final destruction, the earth and the universe will be
submerged under water. Explaining the signs before the
final destruction, he says that ten thousand years before the
end of the Dark Age, Lord Vishnu will depart from the earth.
Five thousand years earlier, river Ganges will disappear from
the earth. Two thousand five hundred years earlier, the local
Lord will depart from the earth. Like this in the Dark Age
when the earth is left with sinners, unholy and cruel
persons, then God will depart from the earth.

According to Chanakya, the students, who wish to
attain knowledge while being attached to allurement/wealth
and pleasures of life, never succeed in their mission. In
reality, they are the stumbling blocks to attaining
knowledge. By eating a meat man becomes vindictive. In
such a state, he loses the virtues of sympathy, welfare,
patience and contentment. It is foolish to expect any
sympathy from him. Do not expect truthful conduct from a
person, who is greedy for money. To earn money, he will
resort to telling any kind of lies. Similarly, a person, who is
sexminded, is unmindful of the meaning and importance of
purity. Such a person only promotes infidelity.

An evil and cruel person's behaviour changes
mysteriously according to circumstances. So, it is impossible
for anyone to understand it. Explaining this, Chanakya says
that like the Neem tree (Indian lilac), even if it is irrigated
with ghee, milk and sugar, it does not change its nature, i.e.
of bitterness; likewise, even after several preaching and
affectionate treatment, it is impossible to turn an evil person
into a gentleman. A man's behaviour is dependent on his
traits at birth, which have been ordained by Lord Brahma.
He behaves accordingly, so a gentleman should not waste
his time to reform him.

Chanakya considers the purity of mind over the purity
of body. In this context, he says that if a man's thoughts are
filled with sins and impurities, then even after taking several
dips in religious places, his soul cannot be purified. Like
even after putting a liquor container through fire, it does not
lose the smell, similarly, even after taking bath in holy
water, a man's impurities are not washed away. So,
according to Chanakya, a man should purify his mind rather
than his body. His welfare lies in it.

On a cruel person criticising and insulting a talented
and decent person, Chanakya says that if a fool considers a
diamond to be an ordinary stone, the diamond cannot be
blamed, for it will still remain a diamond. In other words, a
cruel person may go to any extent in criticising and
humiliating, the talented person's qualities remain as it is,
their importance is not diminished. In this circumstance,
Chanakya has compared the cruel person to a 'Bhilni' (a
mountain tribe female), who considers an elephant's head
diamond useless and throws it; and is happy to don a 'Ratti'
(seed of Abrus precatorius) necklace. In other words, a
person, who criticises a scholar and talented person, is
called a fool.

Chanakya says that one must remain silent while
eating food. Clarifying its importance, Chanakya says that a
person, who observes silence for a year while eating food,
enjoys the pleasures of heaven for millions of years. Even
Gods also worship him.

Chanakya has compared getting education equivalent
to doing a 'tap' (rigorous religious austerity). Like the hermit
purifies himself in the fire of the religious austerity and
earns holy virtues, similarly, a student, while treading on a
tortuous path, attains invaluable wealth like education. But
weaknesses like sexual desire, anger, greed, allurement,
arrogance, taste, makeup, curiosity, excessive sleep and
excessive service are its obstacles. So, he should stay away
from these and only then he will succeed in getting
education.

According to Chanakya, only those Brahmins can be
classified as Sages, who survive on tuber roots-tree tuber
fruits, etc. consider it superior to live in the forest and pray
everyday with offerings for the departed souls. Clarifying
this, Chanakya says that a person, who is satisfied with the
available means and devotes himself in the worship of God
regularly, is a gentleman. Contrary to this, persons, who are
greedy, discontented and atheist, are evil.

In this shloka, Chanakya has described regulations of
Brahmin/Dharma. Describing his activities, he says a
Brahmin should consume food only once in a day and be
satisfied with it. Most of his day should be spent in Yagna 
Havan and study of the Vedas. Simultaneously, he should
have the quality to donate generously and accept
honorarium. Apart from this, he should be able to control
delinquencies and mate at the proper time, only for the
purpose of producing an offspring. Any person, who
observes these as prescribed can only be truly called a
Brahmin.

Vedas specify four classes of people. They have been
classified based on their profession rather than on their
descent or caste. Chanakya says that 'Vaishya' (trader) is a
person, who is involved in conventional activities like
husbandry, farming and business, etc. If a person born in a
Brahmin family undertakes these activities, then he should
also be considered a 'Vaishya'.

Chanakya says that a person, who is involved in the
businesses of lac, oil, ultramarine blue, dyeing colours,
honey, ghee, liquor and meat, etc. is called a 'Shudhra'
(person of the lowest caste). According to him, if a person
born in a Brahmin, Kshatriya, or Vaishya family does these
jobs, then he should also be considered a Shudhra.

Any person, who creates obstacles in others good
deeds, who misguides to cheat by deceit/fraud and whose
atrocities afflict people, such a cruel person, inspite of being
a Brahmin, is called a beast. Categorically, a person
indulging in degenerated and filthy activities is classified as
a beast, even though he might be related to a Brahmin
family.

Chanakya has branded a person a barbarian, who
feels elated in damaging wells, gardens and temples.
According to him, a scholar unconcerned with welfare of the
society and his social responsibilities is called a degenerate.

A person, who steals the wealth of saints/gurus, who
is a consumed adulterator and who has no hesitation in
begging for his food, such a person may be a Brahmin but is
classified as a hangman. Even though born in an upper
caste, they are called degenerates and are looked down in
the society.

Preaching through this shloka, Chanakya says that a
king and a gentleman should use their wealth for welfare
and donation, instead of amassing it. Practising this, great
donor Karna, demon king the Bali and King Vikramaditya
earned worldwide fame. Even today their fame is intact.
Against this, even the unextracted bee honey is spoiled.
Explaining this, Chanakya says that even though a man
should save, he should also keep donating. By doing this,
while on one hand, he earns respect/honour, on the other
hand, he enjoys unrestricted pleasures in the other world.

In this shloka, Chanakya describes a happy family man.
He says that a man can be said to be happy, if he and his
family members are filled with happiness. Where there is all
round happiness and pleasure, the wife has a sweet nature
and is loyal, the children are intelligent and well educated;
sufficient funds are available, the servants are obedient and
loyal; where the guests are appropriately welcomed and
looked after, God's worship is practised and saints are
welcomed-such a home is filled with happiness. People
residing in such a heavenly abode are very lucky.

On the miracles of donation, Chanakya says a donation
is never wasted. In fact, the donated amount is received
back ten-fold. So, a man should donate as much as he can
to the needy and Brahmins in difficulty. By doing this, his
donation opens doors for him to get more wealth.

On public dealings, Chanakya says that man should be
expert in public dealings. This will ensure that he is always
happy. Public dealings cover polite dealing with servants,
affectionate dealing with relations and a tough stand with
evil persons. In addition, it covers an affectionate and gentle
behaviour towards gentlemen and scholars a courageous
stand against enemies, an enduring and respectful
behaviour towards teachers and witty behaviour towards
women. Anyone following these will lead a happy life in the
society.

In this shloka, Chanakya has defined degenerate and
selfish persons. He says that those persons, who refrain
from donating, who think that the study of the Vedas is a
waste, who consider visiting saints/ascetics is pointless, who
have never visited religious places, who have amassed
immoral wealth, who remain behind the facade of arrogance
and vanity, are degenerate, evil and selfish. They only live
for themselves and are not concerned with others.
Addressing such persons, Chanakya says that their life is
worthless. They are only dead weight on this earth. They are
better dead than alive. They should relinquish their life at
the earliest, otherwise they will only promote sin and wrong
doings.

Chanakya says that it is impossible to change what
God has destined in one's fate. In his lifetime, a man acts
and reaps accordingly. If the kareel bush does not bloom in
spring, then it is no fault of spring; if the owl cannot see in
daytime, it is useless to blame the sun; if the rain drops do
not fall in the cuckoos mouth, then it is no fault of the
clouds. Similarly, the difficulties and hardships which a man
bears during his life, are no fault of his. These are predestined.

Even though it has been said that man is affected by
good or bad company, but Chanakya believes that a
gentleman is not affected by being in evil man's company,
for any period of time. Like the sandalwood tree does not
become poisonous, even though poisonous snakes rest on it
and like the flower which grows in the soil, does not carry its
smell, similarly a gentleman who remains in the company of
evil persons, does not shed his righteousness and good
deeds.

A meeting with a gentleman or a saint can get you
their sacred blessings whereas to get the blessings from the
holy shrines, we need to undertake long trips.

A stranger asked a Brahmin, "who is great in this city?"
The Brahmin replied "The cluster of palm trees." The
stranger asked again, "Who is the most benevolent person?"
The Brahmin replied, "Washer man who collects the clothes
in the morning and returns them in the evening." He again
questioned, "Who is the most able person?" The Brahmin
replied, "Everyone is able in stealing other's wives and
wealth." The stranger again asked, "How can you live in
such a city?" The Brahmin replied, "like a worm lives in
filth." In this shloka, Chanakya has highlighted the rampant
faults in the society.

Chanakya has considered that home like a
crematorium, where Brahmins are not respected/honoured,
whose residents are averse to donating, where study and
reading of Vedas is not practised, where havan/yagna are
not performed. He says that such an abode is filled with
ignorance, poverty, sickness, sorrows and difficulties. The
persons residing in such a home are like corpses. Therefore,
for enjoying happy family life, men should continue to
perform acts of worship/prayer, donation and Brahmin
reverence.

In this shloka, Chanakya has identified the true
companions of a person bereft of allurement/wealth. He
says that for a recluse, truth is like a mother, knowledge is
like a father, religion is like a brother, compassion is like a
sister, peace is like a wife and forgiveness is like a son. In
reality, in this destructible world, they are the true
relations/friends. That is why, even a recluse is not alone.

Life and death are the two faces of a coin. A man's
body starts with life and ends with death. That is why, the
body has been called destructible. Beauty, youth, strength,
intelligence- everything gets gradually destroyed. Nobody
knows when his end will come. So, Chanakya has advised a
man to be duty-conscious. He says that every moment man
should be involved in performing good deeds. In it lies his
welfare.

In this shloka, Chanakya describes different type of
pleasure providing things for different living species. He
says for a Brahmin, an invitation to a feast is very pleasing.
For cows, availability of green grass everyday is pleasing.
For women, it is pleasing if their husbands are in full spirits
everyday. But for himself, Chanakya finds pleasure in
conflict. He says that destruction of war is like a celebration
for him.

Chanakya says that the persons who consider others'
women as mothers, others' wealth as dirt and treat others
as equals, as saintsgentlemen. That is the persons with
character, tolerance, contentment, generosity and
compassion are the true gentlemen.

A gentleman is bestowed with virtues. He has
qualities like feeling for religion, sweet nature, willingness to
donate, affability, respect for Gurus, maturity, politeness,
generosity, knowledge of scriptures, good taste and
pleasant nature. Against this, the persons without these
qualities are evil persons.

In this shloka, Chanakya says that God is supreme. He
believes that only God is powerful, extremely kind-hearted,
ruler of all the three worlds and all-pervading. Explaining
this, he says that the 'Kalpavriksha' fulfills all the desires of
a man, but it is only wood. The 'Sumeruparvat' has deposits
of vast treasurers, but it is only stone. The Sun's rays are
illuminating but are intense, whereas the Moon illuminates
and cools but is spotted. The sea inspite of being vast
contains salty water and 'Kamdeva' is without a body. Even
though 'Bali' is considered a great donor, he belongs to the
demon race. Similarly, 'Kamdhenu' who fulfills all the desires
of man, is a cow. Oh Lord! None of these unlike you are
blemishless, radiant, tolerant, generous and devotee loving;
no one can compare with you. So, Oh Lord! You are the
supreme power.

A man can definitely learn something or the other
from the living things around him. Chanakya has established
this saying in this shloka. He says that one must imbibe
knowledge from wherever he can. Princes have politeness
and courtesy. Imbibing these qualities makes man kind
hearted. We can learn the art of affectionate-cum-sweet
speech from scholars and lying from gamblers. Also we
must imbibe the traits of deception/cunning from women.

Spending more than your earning, fighting with others
without any reason and mating with all types of women
these three acts propel man and his family towards ruin. So,
a man should make all efforts to stay away from these acts,
otherwise he will be ruined in no time.

In the present times, some persons are hoarding food
items while others are amassing wealth. Addressing such
persons, Chanakya says that Oh foolish man! At the time of
birth of the child itself, God takes care of his food. Whatever
he is destined to get, nobody can snatch it from him. So,
instead hoarding food and amassing wealth, focus on being
religious. Even animals are able to feed themselves, but
only man has the good fortune of earning blessings by
performing religious acts. So, perform religious acts and be
blessed. This will ensure shaping of your future in this and
the other world.

In this shloka, Chanakya says that like drops can fill a
pot, merging of drops can form a river, by adding pennies, a
man can become wealthy. Similarly, by regular study, for
man there is no knowledge which is unattainable. Likewise,
if a man is involved in religious activities everyday, then he
can amass a hoard of blessings. So, a man should spend
most of his time in righteous activities.

Like a wild pumpkin even after fully ripening does not
become sweet that is, it remains bitter, similarly, an evil
person, howsoever aged he becomes, retains his cruelty and
sins. Even at an elderly age, he continues to scheme. So, a
man should be judged on his abilities rather than his age.
Only then it is possible to know his true nature.

Chanakya considers having a short life-span of doing
good deeds better than a purposeless long life-span. He
says that a long life with sorrows and sins is very painful.
Such a life has no meaning. Against this, if a man's life is
filled with good deeds, even a short life is a pleasure.
Whatever his age, a man should do good deeds. His welfare
rests in it.

In this shloka, Chanakya, advising persons who
reminisce the past and repeatedly feel sorrow or
disappointment, says that the past never returns, the
events which have happened cannot be changed. So,
remembering them repeatedly does not help. Similarly, a
man is totally ignorant of what is going to happen in the
future. So, worrying about it is also a waste. A man should
only focus on the present. If he improves his present, then
his future will also be bright.

Highlighting the importance of good behaviour and
nature, Chanakya says that without too much effort, only by
good conduct and disposition a man can satisfy a scholar, a
gentleman and father. Similarly, by sweet talk, he can
please and satisfy friends, relations and Pundits. In other
words, for a person with good behaviour and sweet talk,
nothing is impossible.

In this shloka, Chanakya has explained the nature of a
gentleman. He says that a saint or gentleman have a
strange nature. Whereas most persons commit numerous
sinful acts to attain wealth, wealth for them is like a blade of
grass or straw. Wealth has no value in their eyes. Even if
they become extremely wealthy, they do not display any
arrogance or commit any sins. There is no change in their
humbleness. Physical pleasure or change in status does not
affect their behaviour.

Chanakya considers affection to be the root cause of all
sorrows. Clarifying this idea in this shloka, Chanakya says
that when a man develops affection for someone, then his
life is guided by that person. When that person is unhappy,
then the person in affection is also unhappy. Similarly, he
feels happiness and fear according to that person. Only
affection repeatedly pushes his soul towards the life/death
cycle. Against this for a man free from affection, all are
equal. He is not affected by anyone's sorrow or happiness.
He maintains the same feelings for everyone in his heart.
So, a scholar should shed excessive affection and lead a
happy life.

People, who only rely on fate, waste their valuable life.
But the persons, who avert crisis by their efforts and
continue to confront adverse circumstances, lead a happy
life. Chanakya believes that though fate cannot be changed,
a man has to live whatever is fated; yet by efforts and
actions the fated adverse circumstances can be turned
favourable. So, a man should not shy away from efforts.

If the king of a kingdom is religious and talented, then
the subjects of that kingdom will also be religious and
talented. If the king is a sinner, then his subjects will also
behave accordingly; because the subjects follow the king.
That is why it is said "As the king, so are his subjects".

Since a criminal always promotes sin, immorality and
wrong acts, he only damages the society. According to
Chanakya, a criminal may be alive, but is like a dead person.
Against this, a person, who has performed auspicious and
good deeds, is remembered even after his death. His
reputation and fame keep him alive. So, a man should try to
earn respect/honour and fame by his good deeds, so that
even after his death, his memory lives.

Religious scriptures list four valours-religion,
economics, sex and salvation. Of these, economics and sex
have been called the valours of this world and religion and
salvation have been called the valours for the other world.
All four provide purpose to human life. Without these
valours, the life is a waste. So, a man should try to achieve
at least one valour.

Describing the thought process and behaviour of cruel
and evil persons, Chanakya says that it is the fundamental
nature of evil persons to envy the progress of others. Apart
from trying to advance themselves, they try to put down
others. But on failing, they resort to criticising to uplift
themselves and degrade others. This is how they try to
prove an able person, to be inept. A person having such
thoughts is an evil person.

In this shloka, Chanakya believes that the mind is the
root cause of all bonds and sorrows. He says that God
provides the soul, human life, only for its salvation. But a
man gets attracted towards weaknesses like sex, anger,
greed, liquor, affection, etc. and goes astray from his aim.
The sole reason for this is the mind. It is only the mind
which pushes a man towards the sense of sexual enjoyment
and leads him towards sins. A man under the hypnosis of
the mind can never free himself from the cycle of life death.
So, a man should contain all weaknesses of the mind and
exercise control over it. Only then it will be possible for him
to improve his life in the other world.

Human body is destructible, so, a man should not be
conceited about it. Any man, who sheds conceit and
develops the passion for worshipping God in his mind, then
wherever his mind wanders, he still can meditate. Anyone,
who is able to understand the true relationship between
body and soul, can meditate irrespective of the
circumstances.

One should give up the desire for all kinds of wishes
and pleasures. Everything is in Gods hands-he decides who
gets what and who gives what. So, everyone should learn to
be satisfied with what they have.

It is the law of nature that you shall reap what you
sow. Like the calf can identify its mother amongst hundreds
of cows, the act identifies its originator. In fact, a man's
actions and its results are linked. So, perform only good
deeds to expect favourable rewards.

Persons, who lead aimless life, can neither find peace
at home nor in the forest. Their life is like a dead weight
which benefits no one. So, to have an aim in life is essential.
Persons who decide on their life's aim never go astray.

In this shloka, Chanakya clarifies the importance of
dedication. He says that any task undertaken with full
dedication never fails to reward. Like a labourer toils and
digs the earth with a spade, is able to extract underground
water, similarly, a student should learn the knowledge
stored with his Guru by dedicated service.

A man desires numerous wishes; some are fulfilled
and others are not. The fulfilment of the wishes depends on
fate and his actions. His fate decides the rewards based on
his actions. If a man wishes for worldly pleasures in return
for his bad deeds, then his wish will never be fulfilled. So,
man should perform good deeds for favourable rewards.

In the 'Vedas' and 'Puranas', the single letter 'Om' has
been called the creation 'Mantra' (hymn). Chanakya has
expressed its importance in this shloka. He says that by
reciting the 'Om Mantra', a man can easily secure the divine
knowledge related with Brahma. The person, who preaches
the divine knowledge, gives the right direction to the
society. Such a Guru must always be revered. But anyone,
who disrespects them, after bearing extreme suffering in
the form of a dog, will be born in the form of a demon.

Chanakya agrees that at the end of this age, the
'Sumeru' mountain will be displaced, all the seven seas will
cross their limits and submerge the earth. But he believes
that even in such a crisis, great men and saints will remain
steadfast on their vow and resolve. Such gentlemen are
trustworthy. Only because of such persons, this earth is
protected from calamities.

According to Chanakya, diamond, pearl, emerald, gold,
etc. are like pieces of stone. He says amongst all the jewels
on earth-water, food and sweet talk are the most precious
jewels. Water and food help a man to survive; nourish his
body and enhance his strength/wisdom. By sweet talk even
the enemy can be befriended. But if any person hankers
after the stones, leaving these jewels, his entire life is filled
with sorrows. Even though one can live without those
stones, it is hard to imagine survival without these valuable
jewels.

A man is rewarded or punished according to his deeds.
Nobody can change this law of nature. The sorrows, griefs,
worries, restrictions and crises which, a man faces in his life,
are the consequences of his sinful deeds. Against this his
good deeds will enable him to live a sorrow- and conflict
free happy life. So, a man should perform superior deeds.

Even though wealth, property, friends, woman and
kingdom can be obtained repeatedly, human form is
attained only once. Once it is annihilated, it is impossible to
attain it again. So, a man should perform good deeds and
use it for worthy causes. Only the life of people, who
perform good deeds everyday, is a success.

"There is great strength in unity" this saying is famous
from times immemorial. Chanakya has explained this saying
in this shloka. He says that like a group of hyenas can fight
a lion, a roof made of bundle of straws stops water,
similarly, if many weak persons unite, then they can face
even the mightiest person.

In this shloka, Chanakya says that if a drop of oil is
dropped in a bowl of water, it spreads all over. An evil
person cannot keep a secret; he spreads it in no time. Even
if an intelligent person gains a little knowledge, he is able to
learn more. Similarly, Chanakya says that if donation is
given to a deserving person, then it is received back by the
donor ten-fold.

In this shloka, Chanakya has told about a man's
restless nature. He says that a man's nature lacks stability,
so it keeps changing every minute. He develops the feelings
of a recluse when he listens to a religious discourse or when
he sees a corpse in a crematorium, the worldly
attachment/wealth seems worthless to him. But after his
return from there, he again gets trapped in the material
world and starts amassing. This restlessness is the biggest
stumbling block, in his attaining salvation. So, a man should
adopt all the possible means to control it.

It is usually seen that a man's conscious is stirred after
performing bad or derogatory deeds and the feeling of
regret sets in. But if realises what is good or bad before
indulging in bad deeds, then he will be get rid of doing the
bad deeds forever. An evil person into the mire of bad deeds
disgraces not only himself but his family also. So, one must
refrain from doing derogatory deeds.

Whenever a man achieves supremacy or success in
any work, he develops a sense of arrogance. Cautioning on
this state, Chanakya says that the world is full of
exceptional donors, devotees, gallant, worshippers and
intelligent people. So, a man should not become arrogant,
on his ability of donation, devotion, bravery, worship,
courage, knowledge of science, politeness and strategic
prowess. Anyone, who becomes arrogant, sins in a hurry
and is ruined.

In this shloka, Chanakya tells about the significance of
true love. He says that the bond of true love binds mutually
to great depths. In such a state, even if one is away, the
other feels him to be close by. In contrast, if there is no
affection, then even if the other person is close by, there is
detachment. Expanding on this argument, Chanakya says
that if a man develops affectionate attachment with God,
then he is always close by. So, man should tie affectionate
bonding with God by worship.

On the benefits of sweet talk, Chanakya says that like
the snake charmer charms the snake with his flute, the
hunter tames the deer, similarly, a man can control anyone
by sweet talk. He can win over enemies by sweet talk and
all his wishes are fulfilled.

King, fire, Guru and woman, according to Chanakya,
for all the four, neither their proximity nor their avoidance is
good; it can lead to a man's complete ruin. The proximity to
king and Guru makes him arrogant and becomes blemished;
whereas staying away leads to neglect. The nearness to fire
results in burning and turning to ash; whereas staying away
from it diminishes its heat and light. Closeness to woman
generates many flaws, whereas separation might cause her
to go astray. To safeguard from this situation, Chanakya says
that a man should find a solution by taking a middle path.
He should remain neither too close nor too far from them.

In this shloka, Chanakya has described certain
things/people where man needs to exercise caution while
dealing with them. He says that fire, water, woman, fool,
snake and royal family while they are useful for a man, but
may be ruinous for him if he is careless. So, they must be
dealt with due caution.

Chanakya considers the life of such persons
meaningful who have the qualities of compassion, love,
welfare, tolerance, etc. In fact, according to him, only such
persons deserve to live life. Life is meaningless, if these
qualities are missing. Therefore, a man should imbibe these
qualities, so that his life is successful.

In this shloka, Chanakya, clarifying his opinion on
criticising others, says that it is the most depraving and
dreadful deed. If a man can give it up, then he can control
the entire world. In other words, by giving up criticising, all
the pleasures will favour a man.

According to Chanakya, only that person is intelligent,
who speaks at the right time, who shows heroism according
to his strength and displays anger as per his capacity. If
however, a man digresses from the topic of discussion does
not consider his strength and gets angry unnecessarily, then
he is considered an intelligent fool.

In this shloka, Chanakya says that different people
have different perspective for a particular thing. For a saint,
a woman is like a corpse, but to a lusty person, she appears
like an image of looks/beauty. For a hyena, she is nothing
but a lump of meat. Here Chanakya clarifies that it is the
man's point of view which enhances or depreciates the
value of a thing. It appears as if he wishes to see it.

Chanakya has advised scholars to keep certain things
secret. He says that a scholar should never discuss with
others his knowledge of an unfailing medicine, his religious
customs, his domestic problems, about his sex with a
woman, bad food and abusive discussions. One should keep
such things to oneself. If he discusses such things with
others, then his being a scholar is useless. He will be
compared to a fool.

Till spring arrives, the cuckoo remains quiet, but once
spring arrives, Cuckoo spreads his melodious voice in all the
directions. By quoting this example, Chanakya has given a
very meaningful advice to scholars. He says that only at the
right time intelligent people should take up the tasks suited
for that time. Against this, people who undertake tasks
unmindful of the time always fail.

If there is a slip in religious activities, then it does not
yield any reward. If life-saving medicines are not used as
directed, they can be life threatening. Excessive waste of
food and wealth leads to poverty. You will face several
hardships by not following Guru's orders properly. Therefore,
Chanakya has directed that religion, medicines, wealth,
paddy and Guru's orders must be carefully handled.

People, who have a strong concern for self-welfare,
guiding them, Chanakya says that they should shun the
company of evil persons and join the company of
gentlemen. Its effect will destroy sexual lust, as well as,
impure thoughts and a man will move towards the right
path. That is by giving up affection wealth and sexual lust, a
man should get engrossed in God worship and charity. His
well-being lies in it.

Stating that amongst all the good deeds, kindness is
the most superior, Chanakya says that anyone, whose heart
is filled with happiness, by being kind to others, does not
require to grow matted hair (jataaye) or apply ash (bhasma)
to gain knowledge and salvation. Even after hundreds of
years of self-mortification (tapasya) what is even rare for
ascetics, that knowledge and salvation can be obtained
easily by being kind to mankind. By imbibing this quality, a
man finds a place in the list of dignitaries. So, the feeling of
kindness must always be preserved in the heart.

From the Vedic times, Gurus have been called the
source of gaining knowledge. Chanakya has also described
the greatness of Gurus in this shloka. He says that a man
learns the deep secrets of Brahma-Shakti, Soul-God and
knowledge of the elements from the Guru only. With the
blessings of the Guru only, a man breaks free from the
arena of affection/wealth and becomes capable to come
face-to-face with Brahma. In fact, the Guru acts like a bridge
between God and worshipper. The debts of such a Guru
cannot be repaid even by the most valuable things on earth.

In this shloka, Chanakya has advised gentlemen to stay
away from evil persons. Suggesting the solution, Chanakya
says they are like thorns, so either crush them with your
shoes or take an alternate path. That is either finish them or
stay away from them.

Through this shloka, Chanakya has described about
physical cleanliness, habits and religious practices.
According to him, those who wear dirty clothes, whose teeth
are dirty, who overeat, who use offensive language, and
who sleep during sunrise or sunset, such persons lose their
grace, health, beauty and even God deserts them. Everyone
avoids such persons, howsoever rich they may be or even if
they belong to the highest caste.

Explaining the wonders of wealth, Chanakya says that
if a man becomes rich, then even strangers become
familiar; wife, son, friends, relations also express affection
and become personal. But if some rich person turns poor,
even near the ones distance themselves. Wife, son, friends,
near ones, relations leave him one after another. This shows
that wealth is a true well-wisher of a man. Anyone, who has
wealth, also controls happiness.

For getting wealth, a man commits many derogatory
acts. But Chanakya says that wealth earned like that is
dissipative. He says that wealth earned by sinning and
malpractice lasts at the most for ten years. In the eleventh
year, he loses all this wealth with interest. Against this,
wealth earned through hard work and honesty is retained
lifelong and it keeps growing. So, a man should refrain from
earning wealth by sinning.

A man's influence in the society is very important. For
'Rahu' (mythological dragons head), even nectar killed him,
whereas for Lord Shiva, even the poison consumed by him
turned to nectar. Even after consuming poison, he was alive
and became famous as 'Neelkanth' (person with blue neck).
In other words, even an improper act committed by an
influential person seems proper to people. Against this,
even a proper act performed by an inadequate person
draws suspicion of the people. Doubts are expressed over it.

Chanakya considers the food left over after feeding the
Brahmins till contentment, as superior food. Similarly, the
love for others, according to him, is true love. He considers
the person, who does not commit sins, to be intelligent; the
religion which protects from sins, falsehood and derogatory
acts, as the true religion.

Even if the diamond is tied to the feet and glass is
adorned on the head, it does not diminish the value of the
diamond. Likewise, placing a scholar on a lower seat and the
fool on a higher seat, does not diminish the status of the
scholar. The scholar will be compared with scholars and the
fool will be counted amongst fools. For a scholar, a higher or
lower level has no meaning.

Commenting on knowledge, Chanakya says that this
world is filled with immense knowledge. The human soul,
even after taking hundreds of births, cannot learn all the
knowledge. But like the swan can drink only the milk from
diluted milk and leave the water, similarly, a man like the
swan should extract the essential elements like milk from
the many scriptures and other studies. That is, a man
should fully understand the meaning of the Vedas in the
short span of his life.

The guests who come from distant places, tired
travelers and people seeking shelter are like God. So, a man
should first feed them their fill and then eat himself. But the
persons, who eat themselves first without feeding them are
like demons.

People, who even after studying religious scriptures
like Vedas, etc. remain ignorant of its essential elements,
who do not have knowledge of Soul-God, remain devoid of
knowledge of their own spiritual self. Chanakya has
compared such persons with a ladle, which stirs the juicy
curry but which remains unaware of its taste and
usefulness. Chanakya says that such a study is a waste.

In this shloka, highlighting the importance of
Brahmins, Chanakya says that Brahmin in the avatar of a
boat, always moves in the opposite direction in the world in
the avatar of the sea. People, who take shelter under the
deck of the boat, cross the sea, whereas the people on the
deck of the boat drown in the sea. That is, the world of
allurement wealth pushes one towards sexual lusts. In this
world, Brahmin is the only boat which moves in the opposite
direction and heads towards salvation. Persons, who
consider Brahmins above all, are in their service, who pay
obeisance to their feet and behave as they do, attain
salvation. Against this, persons who consider themselves
superior to Brahmins, who insult them, are unable to free
themselves from the life-death cycle. They are reborn again
and again, from different 'Yonis' (organ of generation) and
bear untold sufferings.

Even though the Moon is said to be the storehouse of
nectar, lord of medicines, immortal and lustrous, once the
Sun rises over the horizon, all its radiance is lost and it
becomes lusterless and disappears. Similarly, if a person
goes to anyone's house as a beggar, then his respect,
honour and pride are ruined. Therefore, a man should
labour, so that the need to beg does not arise.

Chanakya says that in a foreign place, a man should
mould himself according to the situation and his income.
Like the beetle that normally lives in the lily leaves and is
used to being immersed in the juice from its pollen but in a
foreign place, it has to be satisfied with the odourless and
tasteless juice of the thorny bush. Likewise in a foreign
place a man should be satisfied with the available food. It
will facilitate him to change favourably for that place.

In this shloka, Chanakya has presented a dialogue
between Lord Vishnu and Goddess Lakshmi. Once Lord
Vishnu asked Goddess Lakshmi "Why are you displeased
with the Brahmins"? Then Goddess Lakshmi replied "Oh
Lord! Hermit Agastya in his anger had gulped my father, the
Ocean. The great Saint Brighu had kicked you in the chest.
The superior Brahmins worship my sister Goddess
Saraswati, instead of me. They keep on uprooting lotus
flowers from my abode to pray/worship Lord Shiva. That is
why, I am displeased with the Brahmins".
Even though this dialogue appears to be ordinary, through
it, Chanakya has shown that Brahmins never give
importance to wealth. For them, there is nothing more
important than God's worship.

Chanakya has called the love-bond to be most
superior to all other bonds. In this context, he says that the
beetle that has the capability to bore wood, becomes inert
when closeted inside the delicate lotus flower. That is
because he loves the lotus flower and the fear of causing
any damage to it, makes him inert. He loves the beauty of
the lotus. He fears that as soon as its beauty ends, its love
will also end. So, he ends his life for the sake of its love.

With a man's birth, certain natural qualities manifest
themselves and they remain till death. In this context,
Chanakya says that even after the sandalwood tree is cut,
its fragrance does not disappear, even after the elephant
ages, its sexual craving does not cool off, even after the
sugarcane is crushed its sweetness does not finish,
similarly, when a man born in a high-status family with
virtuous qualities becomes poor, his politeness, humility and
morality do not disappear. He behaves gracefully even in
crisis.

In the Vedas, etc. and other religious scriptures, it has
been said that getting a human life form is very singular. It
is only after undergoing hardships of several births the soul
is fortunate to be born in the human life form. So, instead of
wasting the life in sexual lusts, it should be used for
attaining salvation. Salvation can only be attained by a man
when he sets right his life in this and the other world. In this
shloka, Chanakya tells about it. He says that to set right this
life, anyone who has not earned sufficient funds, who does
not worship God for freeing himself from this worldly
illusion, who has never copulated, such a person does not
benefit in this world or set right his other world. Such
persons only cut the tree in the form of mother's youth with
an axe. In other words, their life neither provides any
happiness to the mother nor earns them any meaningful
credit. So, Chanakya says that a man should enjoy all the
worldly pleasures in this world; but at the same time,
undertake religious activities to try and improve life in the
other world.

In this shloka, Chanakya has described the playful
tendency of women. He says that they have a restless
nature. They talk to someone but look lustfully at someone
else. They worry about someone in the mind and yearn for
someone else in the heart. A woman's love is not for one
only. So their affection should not be taken as attachment.

Any man who thinks that the beautiful woman who
shows affection and acts playfully towards him, is in love
with him, soon loses everything. He behaves like a puppet
and dances on the tune of that woman.

Even though Chanakya was fully aware of the ills of
wealth, he had also accepted its importance and influence.
He says that the intoxication of wealth is so powerful that on
attaining it even a wise/sensible and learned person turns
arrogant. The greed for it places a man into difficulties again
and again. Intoxicated by it, he gets associated with
beautiful women. Thereafter he says that, till today, no man
has won over death. Nor has anyone earned respect by
being a beggar. There is no one in this world, who has not
got into difficulties on account of evil persons. So, it is much
better to be rich than be poor.

In adverse times, a man loses his wisdom and sense.
Even scholars in the midst of a crisis lose their ability to
think and understand. In this context, citing an example,
Chanakya says that a person in the midst of a crisis loses
his sense, like Lord Rama did when he chased a golden deer.
Even though he knew that there are no golden deers, he
chased it to capture it. That is to say that in adverse times,
even intelligent persons act foolish.

In this shloka, Chanakya has accepted the importance
of eminent qualities and virtuosity. He says that on account
of them, even an ordinary person advances towards the top.
Like a crow sitting on top of a building does not become an
eagle, similarly, a person occupying a high seat does not
become great. For greatness, a man must possess good
qualities and be virtuous. By having them, even if he is born
in a lower caste, he can get respect/honour in the society.

Between having wealth and possessing eminent
qualities, Chanakya has said that the latter is more
influential and important. He says that in the society, good
qualities are respected. So, having lots of wealth has no
meaning. Like instead of the full Moon, the smaller Moon of
the next day is worshipped, similarly, a poor person of lower
caste possessing good qualities is treated respectfully.

According to Chanakya, a person devoid of virtues, who
is praised behind his back, is talented. He says that he earns
a respectful place amongst people on account of his talent.
Against this, even if the self-praiser is Lord Indra, he cannot
get that respect just by having his stature. That is the
person, who is praised by the world, truly deserves the
respect.

Like a jewel becomes more attractive when it is laid in
gold, whereas if it laid in iron, it loses its grace, similarly, if a
wise person is talented, then it is most appropriate. By his
wisdom, making proper use of his talent, he takes care of
the welfare of not only the society, but also of his family. So,
it is necessary for a talented person to be wise.

Until such time a talented and wise person does not
get his rightful place, he remains worthless and humiliated.
The situation is like that of the diamond still under the
ground, which not having reached its rightful place, is
treated like a stone. Only when it is laid in gold, then the
viewers praise it. Likewise only when a talented person gets
to his rightful place, his talents are accepted by the society.

Wealth obtained by sinful acts or by causing suffering/
distress to someone, becomes cursed and ruins a man. Such
wealth causes even gentlemen to take the path of sin. One
must avoid such wealth otherwise very soon he will be
ruined along with his family.

According to Chanakya, wealth is important and
useful, only if it does not belong to one person but benefits
the whole society. In this context, he says that the wealth
amassed for the use of one person is like the virtuous
woman of a noble family, who gives pleasure to him only. So
her being or not being does not make any difference to the
society. Against this the wealth, which is like a prostitute
who satisfies and gives pleasure to all the residents apart
from the visitors, is useful. So, instead of amassing wealth
for vested interests, it should be used for the welfare of the
society.

In this shloka, Chanakya has clarified that a man is
never contented with wealth, life, woman and food items. As
much as he gets them, they still remain insufficient. A man
is born with dissatisfaction/discontent and leaves this world
with them. There is no end to his desire. He always remains
agitated and distressed. So, a man should try to save
himself from it.

The Vedas and other religious scriptures describe in
detail the importance of not only food, water, clothes and
land donation but also of Brahmayagya, Devayagya, etc.
and several other holy yagyas. But he says that their
relevance is limited till the fulfilment of the fruits of the acts.
Once, a man obtains the fruits of the acts, their effect is
exhausted. Against this, the donation given to a worthy
person is never in vain. Its effect remains even after the
fulfilment of the fruits of the act. So, donation should only
be given to a worthy person.

Everyone is scared of a beggar; near-dear ones,
friends, etc. also desert him. They shun helping the needy.
This saying has been very eloquently presented by
Chanakya in this shloka. He says that a blade of straw and
cotton are the lightest things in this world. But the beggar is
figuratively even lighter than these two. Even though a
slight breeze blows away the blade of grass and cotton, a
gale cannot blow away the beggar. Explaining the reasoning
behind it, Chanakya says that lest the beggar should
demand anything, even the breeze changes its direction,
that is, the beggar is humiliated by everyone.

Chanakya says that being disgraced is more painful
and damaging than death. He says that it is appropriate for
a disgraced person to die rather than remain alive. A
disgraced person is humiliated on every occasion; the
society views him with hatred; near-dear ones' and friends'
behaviour becomes derogatory towards him. Even his wife
and son tend to avoid him. A respectful death gives more
relief than living such a life.

Sweet talk delights and pleases the mind. By sweet
talk, one can even win over enemies. In this shloka,
Chanakya has accepted its importance. He says that a man
should always talk sweetly. A melodious voice pleases and
delights everyone. Sweet talk does not cost anything. So,
give up bitter talk and embrace sweet talk. It is a sure-spell
to win over the world.

Considering the world to be a bitter tree, Chanakya
says that two sweet and nectar-bearing fruits representing
cultured language and company of saints grow on this tree.
On the one hand, by using cultured language, it is possible
to win over everyone's heart, on the other hand, the
company of saints/sages converts even evil persons to
gentlemen. So, a man should definitely eat these two fruits.

Good characteristics are carried forward from the
previous birth. Being charitable, educated, having restraint,
virtue, etc. like good traits are carried forward from several
previous births by good fortune in this life also. Life must be
made purposeful by making use of them.

In this shloka, Chanakya has clarified the importance
of education and wealth. He says that in the time of need,
the knowledge in books and others' wealth does not help. In
crisis, only the wealth saved by a man helps. Similarly, the
student, who can put the education into practice, can
benefit from it in life. So, a man should definitely save
wealth for crisis. The students should make good use of the
education in life as much as possible.

To learn any knowledge properly and become proficient
in it, a Guru is required. In other words, it is not possible to
gain knowledge without a Guru. Chanakya concurs with this
ancient saying. He says that a person, who forsakes his
Guru, is like that immoral woman, who is humiliated in the
society. Even after bearing a son, she remains without the
glory associated with motherhood. Any person, who leaves
the Gurus ashram and wanders around to gain knowledge,
even if he gains knowledge from anywhere, he becomes a
laughing stock in the gathering of scholars. Such a person,
even though he is knowledgeable, is not respected in the
society.

'Tit for Tat'-Chanakya supported this saying. He
believed there should be a reaction for every action. In other
words, a man should retaliate in the same manner as he has
been treated. Explaining in detail, Chanakya says that if a
man behaves with you like a gentleman, then you must also
reciprocate accordingly. However, if a person intends to
harm you, then he should also be paid back in the same
coin.

In this shloka, Chanakya has discussed about having
devotion for hard work. He says anything which is
impossible for a man to achieve, is beyond his limits, can be
achieved by devotion or untiring hard work. The power of
hard work is limitless; its strength can even make possible
the impossible. So, a man should not shy away from hard
work; rather he should make all possible efforts and by
untiring hard work, make his life happy.

In this shloka, Chanakya says that if a man is greedy,
then he need not worry about the evil persons, because
greed is his biggest enemy, which leads him towards ruin.
The criticiser and back-biter need not be concerned by
criminals. By criticizing, they themselves act like criminals.
No devotion is greater than truth. The blaze of truth
eliminates all the perversions of the body. Therefore, there
is no need for the truthful person to undertake devotional
penance. If a man's mind is polluted and impure, then even
by visiting sacred shrines his afflicted heart is not purified.
Contrarily, anyone whose heart is clear and pure, there is no
need for him to visit sacred shrines. If the heart is filled with
affection, then all other qualities are secondary, whereas
compared to fame, the radiance of all the jewellery is
inferior. After gaining knowledge, a man learns the meaning
of life. It becomes easier for him to understand the mystery
of Soul-God and sighting of Brahma. Such a person becomes
free of the worldly attachments. That is why, he does not
need the wealth which leads to sexual lusts. An afflicted
person bears suffering and pain every moment and dies. For
such a person death is the only way out. So, he should not
fear death.

Shankh and Goddess Lakshmi, both are considered to
be the children of Ratnakar Ocean. But one of them,
Goddess Lakshmi, possesses wealth/affluence and is
worshipped in the world, whereas the other wanders around
with saints/hermits for alms. Inspite of being the brother of
wealthy affluent Goddess Lakshmi, Shankh begs for alms
along with the poor and worldly detached hermits. On
account of spending his life without donating, after death,
he had to become a beggar. That is why, Chanakya says
that in order to preserve usefulness of one's knowledge, a
man should continue to donate as per his ability. This will
ensure his welfare in this and the other world.

A man's nature is like the bird flying in the sky. But not
having wings makes him helpless and he is forced to walk
on the ground. Chanakya considers some helplessness to be
beneficial for man. He says that helplessness keeps a man
and his character from going astray. The lack of power
compels a man to turn celibate; the lack of wealth makes a
man to become a saint/hermit and a sick person starts
worshipping God. The compulsions of old age make a
woman to become loyal to her husband. In this context,
Chanakya says if a man adopts such behaviour without any
compulsion, then his importance will be enhanced even
more.

Chanakya says that giving donation is the best thing
and most helpful. He considers the donation of food and
water to be the most meaningful and fruitful amongst all
donations. He says that feeding a hungry person and
offering water to a thirsty person is most holistically
rewarding. So, as compared to donating wealth, a man
should donate food and water more often. Following the
religious scriptures, Chanakya also accepts the importance
of dwadashi (the twelfth day of each half of a lunar month).
Likewise, he considers the 'Gayatri Mantra' most superior
and the one which fulfills all the desires, amongst all
mantras. He says that a man should recite the Gayatri
Mantra everyday. It eliminates all the obstructions in life.

In this shloka, Chanakya has compared an evil person
to poisonous animals. He says that like snake, honeybee
and scorpion contain poison similarly, an evil person is also
filled with deadly poison. The difference being that the
snakes poison is in its fangs, honeybee's poison in its
forehead and scorpions poison is in its tail; whereas the evil
person's entire body is poisonous. Anyone, who comes in his
contact, cannot escape from his evil effects. So, a man
should stay away from an evil person.

Chanakya says that obeying the husband and being
loyal to him are ornaments of a woman. He says that a
woman, who obeys even her husband's minor wishes, her
present life and other life, both are reformed. Against this, if
she fasts or undertakes religious vows without the
permission of her husband, then she can become the cause
for his unexpected death. After death, such women have to
bear immense torture in hell. So, a woman must obey her
husband and be loyal to him these are her duties.

Serving the husband is above all the other auspicious
acts. This act has been clarified by Chanakya in this shloka.
He says that a loyal woman who is continuously dedicated
to serving her husband, need not donate, fast, visit holy
shrines or take dip in holy rivers. In fact, being devoted to
serving her husband, its self-purifies her.

Through this shloka, Chanakya has prompted a man
to give up superficial ostentation for self-satisfaction. He
says that like the elegance of the hand is not enhanced by
wearing jewellery, bangles, etc. but by donation; the body is
cleansed by bathing rather than by applying sandalwood
paste; mental contentment rests in honour/respect and not
in food and salvation is attained by knowledge rather than
by applying vermilion or wearing ochercoloured clothes. Just
like by superficial ostentation or indulging in sexual lusts,
mind does not attain peace or becomes pure. For that inner
satisfaction is required, which is only possible by helping
others, being kind, being virtuous and with donation.

Through this shloka, Chanakya says that like the
consumption of Tundi fruit (an intoxicating fruit) destroys
wisdom and orris root develops wisdom, likewise a woman
robs man's strength and consumption of milk enhances his
strength. So, a man should avoid unnecessary and
excessive association with a woman.

According to Chanakya, a man should be filled with
the feeling to help others. A man's own welfare lies in
helping others. Anyone whose heart is filled with
benevolence, never faces crisis. All the obstacles in their
path self-destruct and they succeed at every step. Men filled
with benevolence do not face sorrows and lead a happy life.
So, a man should help others as much as he can.

Like all living things in the world, a man also performs
activities like eating, sleeping, copulating, producing
children and feels fear. From this point of view, apart from
the body structure, there is not much difference between
man and animals. But only his behaviour makes him
superior to animals. In it, true adherence to religion is most
important. In fact, anyone who performs religious activities
and observes his duties, deserves to be called a human.
Anyone bereft of these qualities is like an animal.

Like the beetles seeking intoxicant from the forehead
of a unwise elephant are not bothered by the flapping of its
ears to fly them away, they return to the lotus pond. But the
elephant loses the grace of its forehead. Similarly, if any evil
person chases away a beggar, it makes no difference to the
beggar. He gets alms from another house. But the insulted
beggar does not go to him again for it would mar his
reputation. So, a man should refrain from such tendencies.

King, prostitute, 'Yum' (God of death), fire, smuggler,
child, beggar and the villages nuisance creator- these eight
do not understand the sorrows and distress of others. Their
nature is to act as per their whims. So, a man should not
expect any kindness from them.

A man should never mock any helpless and afflicted
person, because tomorrow he may also be in the same
situation. Chanakya has clarified it further in this shloka. An
impertinent boy laughing, asked an old woman "Oh young
girl! What are you searching?" Hearing his mocking tone,
the old woman said, "Due to my old age, my youth in the
avatar of a pearl has fallen down, I am searching it." In this
context, Chanakya says that sooner or later, a man has to
definitely face old age. So, a man should refrain from the
tendency to mock others.

Sometimes, even one good quality overrides many
bad qualities. Because of only one good quality, inspite of
having several bad qualities, a man earns honour/respect in
the society. In this context, Chanakya gives the example of
'Ketki tree' (source of kewra essence-extract of pandanus
flower). He says that snakes habituate on the Ketki tree. It is
crooked and grows in slime but its fragrance bewitches
everyone. This one good quality covers all other bad
qualities. Similarly, even if a man keeps company of evil
persons, is ugly looking, is born in low caste but is wise and
intelligent, inspite of having many bad qualities, he is
respected in the gathering of scholars.

